Behold a Pale Horse by Milton William Cooper
　Chapter 1 Silent Weapons for Quiet Wars
　Chapter 2 Secret Societies and the New World Order
　Chapter 3 Oath of Initiation of an Unidentified Secret Order
　Chapter 4 Secret Treaty of Verona
　Chapter 5 Good-by USA, Hello New World Order
　Chapter 6 H.R. 4079 and FEMA Federal Emergency Management Agency
　Chapter 7 Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988 H.R.5210, P.L. 100-690
　Chapter 8 Are the Sheep Ready to Shear?
　Chapter 9 Anatomy of an Alliance
　Chapter 10 Lessons from Lithuania
　Chapter 11 Coup de Grace
　Chapter 12 The Secret Government
　Chapter 13 Treason in High Places
　Chapter 14 A Proposed Constitutional Model for the Newstates of America
　Chapter 15 Protocols of the Elders of Zion
　Chapter 16 The Story of Jonathan May
　Chapter 17 Documentation: U.S. Army Intelligence Connection with Satanic Church
　Appendix A William Cooper's Military Service Record
　Appendix B UFOs and Area 51
　Appendix C Alien Implants
　Appendix D AIDS
　Appendix E New World Order
　Appendix F U.S. Government Drug Involvement
　Appendix G Kurzweil vs. Hopkins







ÁÁÁÁÁÁÁÁÁÁ：doosho.com　1，2，3，4，5

ББББББББББ：doosho.com　1，2，3，4，5

ĆĆĆĆĆĆĆĆĆĆ：doosho.com　

ĎĎĎĎĎĎĎĎĎĎ：doosho.com　

ÊÊÊÊÊÊÊÊÊÊ：doosho.com　

♀♀♀♀♀♀♀♀♀♀：doosho.com　

ĞĞĞĞĞĞĞĞĞĞ：doosho.com　

ĤĤĤĤĤĤĤĤĤĤ：doosho.com　

ĨĨĨĨĨĨĨĨĨĨ：doosho.com　

ĴĴĴĴĴĴĴĴĴĴ：doosho.com　

ЌЌЌЌЌЌЌЌЌЌ：doosho.com　

ĹĹĹĹĹĹĹĹĹĹ：doosho.com　

♂♂♂♂♂♂♂♂♂♂：doosho.com　

ŃŃŃŃŃŃŃŃŃŃ：doosho.com　

ÓÓÓÓÓÓÓÓÓÓ：doosho.com　

φφφφφφφφφφ：doosho.com　

ℚℚℚℚℚℚℚℚℚℚ：doosho.com　

ŔŔŔŔŔŔŔŔŔŔ：doosho.com　

ŚŚŚŚŚŚŚŚŚŚ：doosho.com　

ŤŤŤŤŤŤŤŤŤŤ：doosho.com　

ÚÚÚÚÚÚÚÚÚÚ：doosho.com　

≚≚≚≚≚≚≚≚≚≚：doosho.com　

ŴŴŴŴŴŴŴŴŴŴ：doosho.com　

ϰϰϰϰϰϰϰϰϰϰ：doosho.com　

ÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÝ：doosho.com　

ŹŹŹŹŹŹŹŹŹŹ：doosho.com　






Behold a Pale Horse by Milton William Cooper





"BEHOLD A PALE HORSE"
Milton William Cooper
And I looked,
and behold a pale horse:
and his name that sat upon him was Death,
and Hell followed with him.
And power was given unto them
over the fourth part of the earth,
to kill with sword,
and with hunger,
and with the beasts
of the earth.
The Holy Bible 
The Book of Revelation 
Chapter 6 
Verse 8
The ideas and conclusions expressed in this work are mine 
alone. It is possible that one or more conclusions may be wrong. 
The purpose of this book is to convince you (the reader) that 
something is terribly wrong. It is my hope that this work will 
inspire you to begin an earnest search for the truth. Your conclusions may be different but together maybe we can build a 
better world.
One
basic
truth can
be used as
a foundation for
a mountain of lies,
and if we dig down deep
enough in the mountain of lies,
and bring out that truth, to set it
on top of the mountain of lies; the entire
mountain of lies will crumble under the weight of
that one truth, and there is nothing more devastating to a
structure of lies than the revelation of the truth upon which
the structure of lies was built, because the shock waves of
the revelation of the truth reverberate, and continue to
reverberate throughout the Earth for generations to
follow, awakening even those
people who had no
desire to be
awakened
to the
truth.
Delamer Duverus

Sometime ago I had the opportunity to meet William Cooper and his wife Annie. It was part of my job to verify whether this man did indeed speak the truth or was just another person seeking fame and fortune. What I found was a rugged, bulldog, driven individual who was kind, thoughtful and tenderhearted. He was truly concerned about you and your welfare.

Bill knew that people were badly informed by a society which spoon-feeds 
you deception until there is no distinction between fiction and reality. He sees 
what many other[s] see happening, and he is not afraid to do something about 
it.
There are many who do not want you to know what Bill has to say. They 
have tried many times to stop him from saying it. The scars on his face and 
the loss of his leg are his badges of sincerity on your behalf.
No one becomes popular by telling people the truth. History records 
what happened to the true prophets of the past. However, some have listened 
to their warnings and were not caught off-guard. Others have put their heads 
in the sand and refused to listen.
Bill has it together, and has put it together for you so you can also be 
one of the informed of the world. A well informed person can make the right 
decision. William Cooper has my vote of approval because I cared enough to 
find out who the man is. Now is your opportunity.
2 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE
There have been many related sequential coincidences all throughout 
my life, incidents that by themselves would have led nowhere. Statistically, the odds against the same or a related sequence of events happening to 
one individual are astronomically high. It is this series of incidents that 
have convinced me that God has had a hand in my life. I do not believe in 
fate. I do not believe in accidents.
I cannot and will not accept the theory that long sequences of unrelated accidents determine world events. It is inconceivable that those with 
power and wealth would not band together with a common bond, a common interest, and a long-range plan to decide and direct the future of the 
world. For those with the resources, to do otherwise would be totally 
irresponsible. I know that I would be the first to organize a conspiracy to 
control the outcome of the future, if I were such a person and a conspiracy 
did not yet exist. I would do it in an attempt to ensure the survival of the 
principles in which I believe, the survival of my family, my survival, and 
the survival of the human race, if for no other reason.
I believe, therefore, that a grand game of chess is being played on a 
level that we can barely imagine, and we are the pawns. Pawns are valuable only under certain circumstances and are frequently sacrificed to gain 
an advantage. Anyone who has studied military strategy is familiar with 
the concept of sacrifice. Those who have seriously studied history have 
probably discovered the real reason we go to war on a regularly scheduled 
basis.
Before reading this book I advise you to play at least two complete 
games of chess. You must learn the rules THEY play by. You must realize 
objectively that some pieces are more valuable than others and that the 
king is the most valuable of all. You cannot learn reality if you get caught 
up in the fantasy that "if s not fair." You must come to know that the 
ultimate outcome of the game is the only thing that counts. You were lied 
to when you were told that "it does not matter whether you win or lose, if s 
how you play the game." Winning in the world of the elite is everything. 
Indeed, it is the only thing. The power elite intend to win.
My research has shown, at this point, that the future laid out for us 
may be just about impossible to change. I do not agree with the means by 
which the powerful few have chosen for us to reach the end. I do not agree 
that the end is where we should end at all. But unless we can wake the 
people from their sleep, nothing short of civil war will stop the planned 
outcome. I base that statement not on defeatism but on the apathy of the 
majority of the American people. Twenty-five years ago I would have 
believed otherwise — but twenty-five years ago I was also sound asleep.
We have been taught lies. Reality is not at all what we perceive it to be.
William Cooper • 3
We cannot survive any longer by hanging onto the falsehoods of the past. 
Reality must be discerned at all costs if we are to be a part of the future. 
Truth must prevail in all instances, no matter who it hurts or helps, if we are 
to continue to live upon this earth. At this point, what we want may no 
longer matter. It is what we must do to ensure our survival that counts. 
The old way is in the certain process of destruction and a New World Order 
is beating down the door.
To cling to the past is guaranteed suicide. To remain apathetic is 
assured enslavement. To learn the truth and then act upon it is the only 
means of survival at this moment. To shrug off the information contained 
in this book and to disregard its warning will result in the complete 
destruction of the Republic of the United States of America. You will never 
get a second warning or a second chance. Like it or not, this is it, stark 
reality. You can no longer turn your head, ignore it, pretend if s not true, 
say "it can't happen to me," run, or hide. The wolf is at the door.
I fear for the little ones, the innocents, who are already paying for our 
mistakes. There exists a great army of occupationally orphaned children. 
They are attending government-controlled day-care centers. And latchkey kids who are running wild in the streets. And the lop-sided, emotionally wounded children of single welfare mothers, born only for the sake of 
more money in the monthly check. Open your eyes and look at them, for 
they are the future. In them I see the sure and certain destruction of this 
once-proud nation. In their vacant eyes I see the death of Freedom. They 
carry with them a great emptiness — and someone will surely pay a great 
price for their suffering.
If we do not act in concert with each other and ensure that the future 
becomes what we need it to be, then we will surely deserve whatever fate 
awaits us.
I believe with all my heart that God put me in places and in positions 
throughout my life so that I would be able to deliver this warning to His 
people. I pray that I have been worthy and that I have done my job.
THIS IS MY CREED
I believe first in God, the same God in which my ancestors believed. I 
believe in Jesus Christ and that he is my saviour. Second, I believe in the 
Constitution of the Republic of the United States of America, without 
interpretation, as it was written and meant to work. I have given my 
sacred oath "to protect and defend the Constitution of the United States of 
America against all enemies foreign and domestic." I intend to fulfill that 
oath. Third, I believe in the family unit and, in particular, my family unit. 
I have sworn that I will give my life, if it is required, in defense of God, the
4 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE
Constitution, or my family. Fourth, I believe that any man without principles that he is ready and willing to die for at any given moment is already 
dead and is of no use or consequence whatsoever.
William Cooper 
August 3,1990 
Camp Verde, Arizona
FOREWORD
William Cooper and daughter Dorothy 
6 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE
The one thing that I find most difficult is to write about myself. It is 
hard to understand why some people thirst for knowledge about me. It 
was never my intention to be anyone's hero. I am certainly no great 
example upon which to base one's life. I consider myself a very average 
normal kind of guy. I have some pretty good points; I have some human 
failings. I am proud of some of my achievements, and there are things that 
I wish I had not done. I'm not perfect, and I am not sure that I ever want to 
be. But it is certain that I do not belong on anyone's pedestal. I am a man 
with a message. And the message will be accepted by only a few. To those 
few who will understand, I am your brother. Maybe...we can change the 
future for the better.
William Moore, in his disinformation publication entitled "Focus," 
said that I am a fundamentalist preacher. Twenty years ago that would 
have been a compliment, but today it implies sleaziness. That is why he 
said it. I am not, and have never been any kind of preacher. I am not 
starting a church. I am not developing a religion. I do not belong to any 
organizations. I do not have an entourage. There is no cult and I am not a 
cult leader. No one camps out around my house.
People have called radio talk shows claiming to have first-hand 
knowledge that I am a notorious radical right-wing extremist. Others have 
said they have proof that I belong to a white racist organization. Someone 
said that they found my name on a list of communist party members. A 
man in Los Angeles, always the same voice, calls when I am on radio 
claiming that I am an alcoholic. The truth is, most of my close friends and 
acquaintances consider themselves to be liberal democrats. My only political stance is Constitutional. My wife is Chinese. That rules out the racist 
propaganda. I fought the communists in Vietnam. I will fight them again, 
if necessary, but only on United States soil. I used to drink a lot of alcohol 
in my younger days. As I became older the booze dwindled to a trickle. 
Now I do not drink much at all. Most of my friends have never seen me 
take a drink. Annie and I are fond of using wine in our cooking. The lies, 
no doubt, will continue.
For the purpose of keeping everything in perspective, let's all understand that attempts to assassinate my character will continue and in all 
probability will become worse. Rather than let that get in the way, I want 
you to believe everything bad that you ever hear about me. See if that changes 
anything that I have been trying to tell you. See if it negates any of the 
proof. I believe that is the easiest way to handle those attacks. You who are 
sincerely interested in knowing will seek out me or those who are intimately close to me. Those who do are the only ones who will ever really know 
who and what I am.
William Cooper • 7
My ancestors came from England, Scotland, and Ireland. I had relatives who fought on both sides in the Civil War. And some who fought in 
the Indian Wars. One of my ancestors was a horse thief in Texas. I don't 
know for sure, but I think he got hung for it. When I was a little boy I heard 
whispers that there was some Cherokee blood in the family. Every time I 
asked about it I was told to shut up. I never could figure out why everyone 
was afraid to talk about the Indian blood. I thought, and still think, that it 
is something of which to be proud. I have since discovered that the old 
folks in my family, like the old folks in almost every family, thought there 
was some stigma attached to being part Indian. In the old days on the 
American frontier, people lived by hard rules. If you weren't accepted by 
your neighbors you were more than likely to end up dead.
My paternal grandmother's family, named Vance, traveled to Texas in 
a covered wagon and were some of the first settlers in the area of Odessa. 
My great grandfather Vance was a real cowboy who eventually became one 
of the first oil-field workers. My great grandmother Vance told me that one 
of their first homes was a dugout on the prairie. My great aunt Sister 
owned a photo of her father, my great grandfather Vance, standing in front 
of a saloon beside his friend. Both men had six-guns stuck in their belts.
When she was about 84 or so she told me that my great grandfather 
Vance had gone off to do some work for a rancher. It was during a 
particularly nasty Indian uprising. My great grandmother was a newly 
married young woman at the time. She rose early one morning and saw 
smoke rising from the direction of one of her neighbors. Soon a war party 
of five young braves rode up to her dugout. She told me that she was 
scared to death but knew if she showed it they would kill her for sure. The 
Indians were hungry. Great Grandma Vance made them get down off their 
ponies, dragged them inside and fed them. They didn't harm her. After 
filling their stomachs they rode off in the direction where she saw smoke 
rising later that afternoon. She said that she learned later that she was the 
only one in the area that had not been burned out or killed. She was a very 
brave woman.
Great Grandma Vance died in a car accident just a short time after 
telling me that story. I thought it was a very strange way for her to die. She 
went from covered wagons to Fords and Boeing 707s. Grandma Vance saw 
just about everything that ever was important in this world happen in her
lifetime.
My paternal grandfather's family also rode across the country in a 
covered wagon. They strayed a little north, however, and ended up in the 
Indian territory now known as Oklahoma. They were on the front line
during the Oklahoma land rush and succeeded in staking out 320 acres on
8 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE
Big Bear Creek near what would eventually become Enid. A little town 
sprang up not too far away called Garber. They raised a lot of kids. I 
remember my great grandmother cooking the biggest breakfast I had ever 
seen. We slept in real feather beds that swallowed us up. We ran to the 
outhouse in the middle of the night because we were embarrassed to use 
the chamber pot that Great Grandma kept handy under every bed. In the 
morning everyone would crowd around the wood stove in the kitchen or 
the coal stove in the parlor trying to get warm.
My dad had given me a .22 rifle for Christmas and Great Grandma's 
farm was the first place that I ever went hunting. I got up before the sun 
one morning, tiptoed downstairs, and headed out for the creek. About two 
hours later I saw my chance and shot a quail sitting up in a tree. I strutted 
proudly to the farmhouse holding that quail up for all to see. Luckily the 
farmhand saw me first. He burst out laughing and asked me what I 
thought I was doing with that sparrow. I ran off and buried that bird and 
never said a word to anyone. I learned later that quails don't sit in trees. 
For those who may think this to be a terrible thing, I must tell you that 
every boy in those days was given a rifle and taught to hunt. During 
hunting season many a family managed to put aside some extra money 
because the boys brought home meat from the hunt. That money saved 
was sorely needed. It was considered a duty for a citizen to own a gun in 
order to carry out the intent of the 2nd amendment to the Constitution. As 
long as the citizens owned guns the government could never become 
oppressive.
My mother's family came from Scotland and settled in North Carolina. They were hardworking and thrifty folk. Most of them were poor. I 
never knew much more about my mother's family. I don't even remember 
anyone talking much about them. I know that my grandmother, Nellie 
Woodside, was forced to give up some of her children when her husband 
died. There was not enough money to feed all of the kids. My mother was 
one of those chosen to live in a children's home until things got better. No 
one ever talked about my mother's father. When I asked about my grandfather I was told, "Red was no good, and you just mind your own business." I got the feeling that nobody liked him. He died before I entered this 
world.
I was born May 6, 1943. I was reared in a military family. My father is 
USAF Lt. Col. (Ret.) Milton V. Cooper. He prefers to be called Jack, the 
nickname given to him by the family when he was a boy. Dad began his 
Air Force career as a young cadet flying biplanes and retired as a command 
pilot with thousands of hours to his credit. I have a picture of him standing 
in front of an old biplane in his leather jacket and his cap with the earflaps
William Cooper • 9
My mother and father 
10 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE
just like Snoopy wears.
I can remember the pilots gathered around the kitchen table talking 
about the planes and telling stories. Sometimes they discussed strange 
things called foo fighters or UFOs. When we were lucky they got out the 
projector and showed Kodachrome slides. That was a special treat. By the 
time I was eight years old, I think I had already seen and been inside every 
plane the Air Force (which used to be the Army Air Force) had ever owned. 
I had flown in several. I had seen many of them crash and had friends who 
had lost their fathers.
I remember one night in the Azores at Lages Field. We were at the 
base theater watching a movie when the projector ground to a stop, the 
lights came on and a plea was made for blood donors. We knew there had 
been a disaster. Everyone went outside and looked down the hill at the 
flightline. It was literally consumed in flames. We could see men on fire 
running through the night. A B-29 had crashed. I forget if it had been 
taking off or landing; but I will never forget the scene that was spread 
before me on that night. No one went back to the movie even though we 
had only seen half. I was nine years old but felt much older. I had seen 
many crashes, and I would see many more in the years to come. But I never 
saw anything that could ever compare to the wreckage, the fire, the devastation, or the loss of life caused by the crash of that B-29. We left the Azores 
a year later. As we climbed into the sky I looked out the plane window. I 
could still see pieces of the wreckage where it had been pushed away from 
the runways. It was that incident that gave me an appreciation of the 
dangers that my dad faced on a daily basis. I knew then how lucky we 
were to see him walk in the door. Aviation wasn't safe in those days, 
especially for military pilots. We all knew families that had lost someone in 
a crash.
I didn't always love my father. He was a strict disciplinarian. My dad 
did not believe in "spare the rod" and his belt was put to use frequently in 
our family. I was a very sensitive but willful child. Rules didn't mean 
much to me until I got caught breaking them. Many times I was the focus 
of his anger. Like most kids, I didn't understand. I thought he was a 
tyrant. Now I appreciate his upbringing. I know, beyond the shadow of a 
doubt, that without his strict discipline we most probably would have 
turned out bad.
Now I love my Dad. He is my friend. He is an independent, gregarious, feisty, tough, confident, adventurous, sometimes overbearing, 
handsome, big bear of a man. My mother told me that she fell in love with 
him because he looks like John Wayne, and he does. I have watched him 
progress from one who disdained any public show of affection to a man
William Cooper • 11
who is just as likely to hug you as shake your hand. On the other side, he 
has at times made me so angry that I could have punched him in the 
mouth, but I never have. If s damn hard for anyone not to like him. He is 
always up to some mischief, and I can guarantee you that no one is ever 
bored around my father.
My mother is a real Southern lady. They used to call her kind a 
Southern belle. She is one of the last of a dying breed. Dovie Nell (Woodside) Cooper is the type of woman that men like to dream about when 
they're lonely. She is the kindest, gentlest, woman that I have ever known. 
I do not make that statement just because she is my mother. It's true. She 
was beautiful as a young woman and she is beautiful now. My mother is 
one of those people who, once she likes you, can't be driven away. She is 
loyal to a fault. I have seen her during the good and during the bad times. 
She never flinched, no matter what. It always surprised me that she could 
be so tough and yet so kind, gentle, and loving all at the same time. Woe to 
anyone who ever harms my dad or one of her children in her presence. She 
is the best cook who ever stepped foot in any kitchen that was ever built. I 
love my mother probably more than anyone else in this world.
I have a brother Ronnie and a sister Connie. They are fraternal twins 
two years younger than me. We were closer than most siblings when we 
were children because we spent so much of our life in foreign countries, 
where oftentimes we found ourselves unable to communicate except with 
each other. We had school friends, but school was often many miles from 
where we lived. We had few toys. Most of them were things that mother 
gave us such as spools, cigar boxes, string, or anything else that we could 
find to keep us occupied. Every Christmas was a delight because we 
always got some REAL toys. Ronnie and I had a propensity to see how 
things worked, however, so they never lasted long. Everything we wore, 
including shoes, was ordered from the Sears catalog. It was the wish book, 
and we never tired of looking through it. We alternately loved each other, 
hated each other, fought each other, and defended each other, as I guess all 
kids do.
Ronnie, his wife Suzie, and their daughter Jennifer live in Garber, 
Oklahoma, where Ron sells John Deere farm equipment. Ron & Suzie built 
their house with their own hands. As far as I know they intend to live in 
that house until they die. Ronnie served as an officer in the Army. In 
Vietnam he earned the Silver Star. We haven't seen each other since 1976 
after he came to visit me in the hospital after I lost my leg. Nevertheless I 
love him and I miss him a lot. Neither one of us can afford to travel much 
unless it's business, but one of these days soon I'm going to surprise him 
unless visit. Connie has shown me pictures and Ron looks just like my
12 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE
great grandfather. Almost every picture I've seen shows Ron in chaps, a 
Stetson, boots, and either near or on a horse. I guess that is about how it 
should be, as Ronnie always wanted to be a cowboy when he was a child. 
Connie has really turned out to be a fine woman. When she was little 
I sometimes liked her and sometimes didn't. Little boys don't usually have 
much use for little girls. Since we only had each other to play with, 
however, Ronnie and I loved her a lot; but little boys just can't ever admit 
anything like that. I remember Connie always followed me everywhere I 
went. I couldn't get rid of her no matter how hard I tried. Her devotion 
and loyalty made me love her all the more. Of course I pretended that she 
was a pain in the ass. As we grew older and began to realize that there was 
a really big difference between boys and girls Connie began to take on an 
air of mystery. From that time until I was about 18 she baffled me completely. I remember when she was around 13 or so she would throw 
temper tantrums when she got angry. She would stomp her feet, scream, 
run to her room and then slam the door. Ronnie and I thought it was a 
great show but couldn't for love or money understand why she did it. 
When we asked mom she would just shake her head and say, "Hormones."
William Cooper, brother Ronnie, sister Connie
William Cooper • 13
Connie grew up to be a beautiful woman and eventually married her 
high school sweetheart, Gus Deaton. They had two beautiful children, 
Janice and Chrissie. Janice is very much like Connie, loving and loyal. 
Chrissie is different. She's a redhead who loves to party. I guess Chrissie 
represents a freedom of spirit more than anything else.
Connie's marriage deteriorated and no one could figure out what was 
happening until Gus was diagnosed as having brain tumors. It was tragic. 
Everyone really loved Gus. As his disease progressed and he began to do 
crazy things, people just drifted away. I have always nurtured a very 
special love for Chrissie. She never deserted her father. When no one else 
could stand to be around him, Chrissie chose to go and live with him "so 
he won't be lonely," she said. Even now I get all choked up when I think of 
that little red-headed girl going to live with her sick father "so he won't be 
lonely." His behavior was such that no one else could stand to be around 
him. At least that is what I'm told. It wasn't Gus's fault that he became ill 
and I've always felt it just wasn't fair to Connie, the children, or Gus. I've 
since learned that life is seldom fair.
Connie eventually remarried and moved to Austin, Texas, where she 
has established herself as a valuable employee of a large bank. Her husband is an executive for McGraw Hill. His name, coincidentally, is Ron. 
We all really like Ron McClure, especially Dad, who has formed a close 
friendship with him. My sister has really blossomed into a wonderful 
woman. She has become one of my dearest and closest friends. She has 
grown to be so much a part of me that even now I sometimes get a feeling 
to look behind me to see if that little girl is still there. I feel a great loss 
when I see that if s only Sugarbear, my faithful dog; but then, I love him 
too, so can't complain.
I graduated in 1961 from Yamato High School in Japan. That fall I 
enlisted in the Air Force. I really wanted to go into the Navy but I had 
always had a tendency toward car sickness and seasickness. I attended 
basic at Lackland Air Force Base, Texas, and Technical School for Aircraft &
Missile Pneudraulics at Amarillo Air Force Base.
Upon completion I was ordered to the 495th Bomb Wing of the 
Strategic Air Command at Sheppard Air Force Base just outside Wichita 
Falls. The name was later changed to the 4245th Bomb Wing — don't ask 
me why. In just a short time I had gone from a skinny kid who didn't know 
much about anything, even though I thought I did, to an airman who had 
a Secret(!) security clearance and worked on B-52 bombers, KC-135 refueling aircraft, and Minuteman missiles.
I saw REAL atomic bombs. I worked around them on a daily basis. 
Because of that I had to wear a dosimeter just in case I was exposed to
14 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE
radiation. In those days we were the elite of the Air Force and we knew it. 
I received a Letter of Commendation for my work. In due time I was 
awarded the National Defense Medal and the Air Force Good Conduct 
Medal. (Actually, I think everyone was awarded the National Defense 
Medal so that no one would be embarrassed standing in formation with 
nothing on their chest.)
It was during this time that I met a couple of sergeants who kind of 
adopted me. We went out to the clubs together and usually ended up 
chasing women and drinking a lot of beer. They told me several stories 
about being attached to a special unit that recovered crashed flying saucers. 
Sgt. Meese told me that he had been on one operation that transported a 
saucer so large that a special team went before them, lowering all telephone 
poles and fence posts. Another team followed and replaced them. They 
moved it only at night. It was kept parked and covered somewhere off the 
road during the day. Since we were always half-tanked when these stories 
came out, I never believed them — sergeants were known to tell some tall 
tales to younger guys like me.
On November 22, 1963, I was on duty as CQ (Charge of Quarters) for 
the Field Maintenance Squadron. Most of the men were out on the flightline working, the barracks orderlies had been assigned their tasks, the first 
sergeant was gone somewhere, and I was alone. I turned on the orderly 
room TV to watch the live broadcast of the President's motorcade in Dallas. 
I was not prepared for what I saw. I stared in disbelief as the events 
unfurled in front of my eyes. I knew that something had happened, but 
what? I had seen and heard the assassination, but my mind was not 
accepting it. I kept staving at the set to discover what it was that had 
happened when slowly the realization crept over me. A numbness spread 
up my arms and legs. I saw what had happened! The hair stood up on the 
back of my neck and a chill went down my spine. President Kennedy had 
been shot right in front of my eyes!
At that point huge tears began to stream down my face. Waves of 
emotion rushed through my body. I felt that I had to do something, so I 
picked up the direct line to the command center. I choked back the tears. 
When the command duty officer answered, I told him that the President 
had just been shot in Dallas. There was a pause, and he asked me, "How 
do you know he has been shot?" I told him that 1 had watched it on 
television and then hung up the phone. I was numb all over.
A few minutes later the command duty officer called back and ordered 
a red alert at DEFCON TWO (Defense Condition Two meant war was 
imminent). The roar of jet engines could already be heard as the alert crews 
taxied their planes toward the runway. I was scared shitless as I ran from
William Cooper • 15
barracks to barracks routing out the night shift and those who had the day 
off. We had been told that we had about 15 minutes to launch all of our 
planes before the first atomic bomb would hit us in the event that the 
Russians launched an attack.
I didn't even lock up the orderly room. I just jumped in the first car I 
saw, rode to the SAC compound/ and reported to my red alert duty station. 
For the next three days I slept under the belly of a B-52 bomber staring at 
the Armageddon that hid just inside the closed bomb-bay doors. We 
thought the shit had finally hit the fan. It was a great relief when the alert 
was ended. I left the Air Force with an honorable discharge in 1965.
In December of the same year I joined the Navy. I had always loved 
the ocean. I had wanted to be a sailor since I was a little boy. Seasick or not 
I made up my mind to follow my dream. I was sent to the Naval Training 
Center in San Diego for boot camp. Because of my prior Air Force experience I was made the Recruit Chief Company Commander. I was 
allowed to keep my same rank and pay grade. We had a good bunch of 
guys in my company and we had a great company commander. Chief 
Campbell, chief electricians mate. He turned the company over to me. The 
chief was a good man. He was only interested in teaching us what we 
needed to know and in keeping us out of trouble. Unlike most boot camp 
instructors, Chief Campbell had no axe to grind and wasn't trying to prove 
anything to himself or anyone else. He was truly our friend.
During boot camp I volunteered for submarines (my sense of adventure was very strong). I was accepted, and upon completion of basic 
training, was ordered to the USS Tiru (SS-416) at the submarine base at 
Pearl Harbor, Hawaii. Spitfire and damnation, no one could possibly be 
that lucky! I couldn't believe my eyes when I read my orders. Here I was 
fulfilling my dream of being in the Navy. I got exactly what I asked for the 
first time that I asked for it, which was extremely rare in any branch of 
military service. And to top it all off, I was being sent to Hawaii, the land 
of tropical paradise. I was in seventh heaven.
I landed in Hawaii with no time to play and took a cab directly to the 
sub base. My submarine was nowhere to be found. I kept asking people 
until I found someone who told me that my boat (subs are called boats in 
the Navy) was not at the sub base but in dry dock in the Pearl Harbor Naval 
Shipyard. I hailed another cab.
The cab driver dropped me off at the head of a pier that looked like it 
had never been cleaned up after the Japanese bombed Pearl Harbor. It was 
covered with what appeared to be hoses, huge electrical cables, rusting 
metal of every conceivable size and shape that you can imagine. The air 
was rank with the smell of diesel, welding fumes, paint, and steel. If there
16 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE
is a hell on earth, I thought, this has to be it. I walked up the pier, over to 
the edge, and looked down into the dry dock. There, stripped of all dignity, 
lying naked and cut cleanly in half, was my boat, the USS Tiru. Men were 
scrambling all over it. They looked like ants swarming over a dead grasshopper. Brilliant flashes of light brighter than the sun drove sparks high 
into the air and then down in a beautiful flow to the bottom of the dock. I 
couldn't believe my eyes. Someone actually expected me to go out to sea, 
then underwater, in what appeared to me to be a motley collection of 
cut-up rusting metal scavenged from some satanic junkyard, stuck 
together by demons with welding torches. My luck had just run out.
I reported to the barracks barge moored in the water on the other side 
of the pier and was given a hammock for when I had the duty; then I was 
sent to the sub base barracks where I was assigned a rack and a locker. I 
wanted to go into Honolulu but quickly discovered non-quals did not rate 
liberty. It was getting worse.
The next few months were spent sanding, painting, lifting, and learning the boat. The men of the crew, except for the chief cook, were great. 
The chief cook was drunk every minute of the day and night. He didn't 
like me, so I didn't get much to eat. His dislike stemmed from my first 
morning when I walked into the galley and watched as the other crew 
members ordered their breakfast. When there was an opening I stepped 
up and asked for eggs over easy. That's when the chief hit the overhead 
and vowed that I would never eat a meal in his mess decks. He wasn't 
kidding, either. The only time after that morning that I got anything to eat 
out of that galley was when the chief cook was ashore.
To this day I still don't know what I did wrong. I could have gone to 
the captain, but if I had done that I might as well have put in for a transfer 
at the same time. It wasn't long, though, before I was able to locate where 
he hid his booze. I made his life miserable from that moment on. I won't 
tell you what I laced his vodka with, but it wasn't anything you'd ever 
want to drink, believe me. I kept that chief so sick that he was transferred 
off the boat for medical reasons. I didn't want to hurt him, but it was either 
get rid of him or starve to death. I made up my mind that chief or no chief 
I wasn't going to go to sea on a boat that wouldn't feed me.
I didn't relish going to sea with a drunk chief in charge of closing the 
main induction valve when the boat made a dive. When a submarine goes 
underwater certain valves MUST be closed or the boat will flood with 
water and everyone will drown. The main induction is the MOST IMPORTANT of those valves. It was the cook's duty to close it, because the valve 
was in the galley on board the USS Tiru.
I made two especially close friends while on the Tiru. A black seaman
William Cooper • 17
named Lincoln Loving and an American Indian seaman we called Geronimo. The three of us were inseparable. Lincoln was best man at my first 
marriage. Of the three Geronimo was the most experienced seaman, so he 
taught Lincoln and me. He knew everything there was to know about the 
boat, rope, paint, and a whole lot of other things that a man had to know to 
survive in the Navy. I knew the most about getting along in the military, so 
I taught Geronimo and Lincoln. Lincoln knew every really good spot on 
the Island where we could have a good time, so he led the liberty party.
Three things really stand out in my mind about the time that I spent on 
the Tiru. The first was an incident that occurred during a test dive while 
we were creeping along at about 3 or 4 knots at a depth of 600 feet off the 
Island of Oahu. Lincoln and I had just been relieved from watch and were 
in the after battery talking when we were knocked off our feet. We heard a 
loud CLANG forward and felt the boat lunge to port. Then we heard a 
sound that made our blood run cold. I could literally feel the blood drain 
from my face as I listened to whatever it was that we hit scrape along the 
starboard side of the hull. Lincoln and I froze. We held our breath as metal 
screeched upon metal. I thought it would never end. No one moved, 
anywhere.
Finally, after what seemed a lifetime, the boat lurched and the noise 
disappeared aft. If it had pierced the hull none of us would be alive today. 
We never found out what it was. When we returned to Pearl, divers went 
down to have a look. When they surfaced they reported that the starboard 
bowplane was damaged and the hull was gouged all along the starboard 
side from bow to stern. We went in for repairs. In a couple of days we were
good as new, but I certainly had an entirely different perspective on life.
The second thing that stands out happened to another boat that had
been out participating in torpedo attack exercises with another submarine.
I remember seeing the boat entering the harbor with a large tarp over the
conning tower. I could see something holding the tarp up on each side of
the tower but I couldn't see what it was. Later, Geronimo, Lincoln and I
walked over where the boat was berthed and looked under the tarp. The
other boat in the exercise had scored a direct hit! What we saw was a
torpedo sticking completely through the sail. We started laughing. Then
we looked at each other and decided that it wasn't so funny after all. This
submarine business was not quite as attractive as I'd thought.
Number three happened during a transit between the Portland-Seattle
area and Pearl Harbor. I was the port lookout during the afternoon watch
(1200 to 1600 hours). Geronimo was the starboard lookout. Ensign Ball
was the OOD (Officer of the Deck). We were doing 10 knots on the surface
and the three of us were on the bridge in the conning tower. It was a bright
18 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE
day, but the sun was obscured by a low layer of clouds. It was cool. We 
had a bit of fun when someone below requested permission to put a man 
on deck forward to get something that was needed from the waterproof 
deck locker. The locker was under the deck plate all the way up on the bow 
near the forward torpedo-room escape trunk. Geronimo and I laughed 
when Ensign Ball gave his approval. He really shouldn't have, because we 
were running a pressure wave over the bow. When we saw who it was 
they had sent on deck we roared with laughter. We looked down over the 
side of the sail at the deck-level door just as it popped open and Seaman 
Lincoln Loving stuck his head out. He didn't look happy.
Lincoln reached down and put the runner in the safety track in the 
deck, fastened the safety belt around his waist and, grabbing the handrail, 
stepped out on deck. He looked up at us with that "don't you laugh at me" 
look that he did so well. It took him a few minutes to get up the nerve to 
let go of the handrail and begin to make his way forward against the wind 
and the pitching deck. Gingerly, he crept forward until he was just at the 
point where the pressure wave was rolling off the deck when the bow 
heaved free of the water on its cyclical upswing.
I could see that Lincoln was trying to time a run forward when the 
bow was out of the water. He made a couple of false starts, then ran 
slipping on the wet deck, disappearing into the access hole for the forward 
torpedo-room escape hatch. The bow plunged underwater and I found 
myself sucking air as I imagined the cold saltwater swirling around me. It 
wasn't me, though, it was Lincoln. I gripped the top of the sail as I waited 
for the bow to swing up, hoping that Lincoln wouldn't panic.
What we saw next could have been a clip from one of those old 
Keystone Cops movies. Lincoln was flailing water so hard that it looked 
like he had 40 arms and 40 legs. It was only then that I realized that Lincoln 
had joined the Navy but he didn't know how to swim. When he finally 
gathered a foothold, the half-drowned seaman exploded up out of that hole 
like a Polaris missile and ran back to the conning tower just as fast as his 
wet leather soles would carry him.
Ensign Ball, Geronimo, and I laughed for a good ten minutes. In fact, 
every time we saw Lincoln for the next two days we would burst out 
laughing. Lincoln didn't think it was funny and didn't miss a chance to 
slug us every time we laughed.
Lincoln went below. Geronimo and I began the unending task of 
sweeping the horizon from bow to stern, then the sky from horizon to 
zenith, and then back to the horizon from bow to stern. Again and again, 
and then a pause to rest our eyes and chat for a few minutes. I asked 
Ensign Ball to call for some hot coffee. As he bent over the 1MC, I turned,
William Cooper • 19
raising my binoculars to my eyes just in time to see a huge disk rise from 
beneath the ocean, water streaming from the air around it, tumble lazily on 
its axis, and disappear into the clouds. My heart beat wildly. I tried to talk 
but couldn't; then I changed my mind and decided I didn't want to say 
that, anyway. I had seen a flying saucer the size of an aircraft carrier come 
right out of the ocean and fly into the clouds. I looked around quickly to 
see if anyone else had seen it. Ensign Ball was still bending over the IMC. 
He was ordering coffee. Geronimo was looking down the starboard side 
aft.
I was torn between my duty to report what I had seen and the knowledge that if I did no one would believe me. As I looked out over the ocean 
I saw only sky, clouds, and water.
It was as if nothing had happened. I almost thought I had dreamed it. 
Ensign Ball straightened, turned toward Geronimo and said the coffee was 
on the way up.
I looked back toward the spot, about 15 degrees relative off the port 
bow, and about 2-1/2 nautical miles distant. Nothing, not even a hint of 
what had happened. "Ensign Ball," I said, "I thought I saw something 
about 15 degrees relative off the bow, but I lost it. Can you help me look 
over that area?" Ensign Ball turned, raising his glasses to eye level. I didn't 
know it at the time, but Geronimo had heard me and turned to look. He 
was happy that something had broken the monotony.
I was just lifting the binoculars off my chest when I saw it. The giant
saucer shape plunged out of the clouds, tumbled, and, pushing the water
before it, opened up a hole in the ocean and disappeared from view. It was
incredible. This time I had seen it with my naked eyes, and its size in
comparison with the total view was nothing short of astounding. Ensign
Hall stood in shock, his binoculars in his hands, his mouth open. Geronimo
yelled, "Holy shit! What the — hey! did you guys see that?" Ensign Ball
turned, and looking right at me with the most incredulous look on his face,
said in a low voice, "This had to happen on my watch!" He turned, quickly
pressing the override on the IMC and yelled, "Captain to the bridge,
Captain to the bridge." As an afterthought he pressed the switch again and
yelled, "Somebody get a camera up here."
The Captain surged up the ladder with the quartermaster on his heels. 
Chief Quartermaster Quintero had the ship's 35-mm camera slung around
his neck. The Captain stood patiently while Ensign Ball tried to describe
what he had seen. He glanced at us and we both nodded in affirmation. 
That was enough for the Captain. He called sonar, who during the excitement had reported contact underwater at the same bearing. The Captain 
announced into the 1MC, "This is the Captain. I have the conn." The reply
20 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE
came back instantly from the helm, "Aye, Aye sir." I knew that the helmsman was passing the word in the control room that the Captain had 
personally taken control of the boat. I also knew that rumors were probably flying through the vessel.
The Captain called down and ordered someone to closely monitor the 
radar. His command was instantly acknowledged. As the five of us stood 
gazing out over the sea the same ship or one exactly like it rose slowly, 
turned in the air, tilted at an angle and then vanished. I saw the Chief 
snapping pictures out of the corner of my eye.
This time I had three images from which to draw conclusions. It was 
a metal machine, of that there was no doubt whatsoever. It was intelligently controlled, of that I was equally sure. It was a dull color, kind of like 
pewter. There were no lights. There was no glow. I thought I had seen a 
row of what looked like portholes, but could not be certain. Radar reported 
contact at the same bearing and gave us a range of 3 nautical miles. The 
range was right on, as the craft had moved toward the general direction 
that we were headed. We watched repeatedly as the strange craft reentered 
the water and then subsequently rose into the clouds over and over again 
until finally we knew that it was gone for good. The episode lasted about 
10 minutes.
Before leaving the bridge the Captain took the camera from the Chief 
and instructed each of us not to talk to anyone about what we had seen. He 
told us the incident was classified and we were not to discuss it, not even 
amongst ourselves. We acknowledged his order. The Captain and the 
Chief left the bridge. Ensign Ball stepped to the 1MC and, pressing the 
override switch, announced, "This is Ensign Ball. The Captain has left the 
bridge. I have the conn." The reply, "Aye aye sir," quickly followed.
Those of us who had witnessed the UFO were not allowed to go 
ashore after we had berthed in Pearl. Even those of us who didn't have the 
duty were told we had to stay aboard. After about two hours a commander 
from the Office of Naval Intelligence boarded. He went directly to the 
Captain's stateroom. It wasn't long before we were called to wait in the 
passageway outside the Captain's door. Ensign Ball was called first. After 
about 10 minutes he came out and went into the wardroom. He looked 
shaken. I was next.
When I entered the stateroom, the Commander was holding my service record in his hands. He wanted to know why I had gone from the Air 
Force into the Navy. I told him the whole story and he laughed when I said 
that after putting off the Navy for fear of chronic seasickness, I hadn't been 
seasick yet. Suddenly a mask dropped over his face, and looking me 
directly in the eyes he asked, "What did you see out there?"
WilliamCooper • 21
"I believe it was a flying saucer, sir," I answered.
The man began to visibly shake and he screamed obscenities at me. 
He threatened to put me in the brig for the rest of my life. I thought he 
wasn't going to stop yelling, but as suddenly as he began, he stopped.
I was confused. I had answered his question truthfully; yet I was 
threatened with prison. I was not afraid, but I was not very confident, 
either. I figured I had better take another tack. Eighteen years with my 
father and four years in the Air Force had taught me something. Number 
one was that officers just do not lose control like that, ever. Number two 
was that if my answer had elicited that explosion, then the next thing out of 
my mouth had better be something entirely different. Number three was, 
that his response had been an act of kindness to get me to arrive at exactly 
that conclusion.
"Let's start all over again," he said. "What did you see out there?"
"Nothing, sir," I answered. "I didn't see a damn thing, and I'd like to 
get out of here just as soon as possible."
A smile spread over his face and the Captain looked relieved. "Are 
you sure, Cooper?" he asked.
"Yes sir," I replied, "I'm sure."
"You're a good sailor, Cooper," he said. 'The Navy needs men like 
You'll go far with the Navy." He then asked me to read several pieces 
of paper that all said the same thing only with different words. I read that 
if I ever talked about what it was that I didn't see, I could be fined up to 
$10,000 and imprisoned for up to 10 years or both. In addition I could lose 
all pay and allowances due or ever to become due. He asked me to sign a
piece of paper stating that I understood the laws and regulations that I had 
just read governing the safeguard of classified information relating to the 
national security. By signing, I agreed never to communicate in any manner any information regarding the incident with anyone. I was dismissed, 
and boy, was I glad to get out of there.
Not long after that incident I devolunteered from submarines. I was
transferred to the USS Tombigbee (AOG-11).
The Tombigbee was a gasoline tanker. It was more dangerous than the 
sub. The Captain was crazy and the crew was a combination of idiots and
misfits. I once had to draw my pistol while I was petty officer of the watch 
to prevent an officer from being attacked by a seaman.
The Tombigbee collided in the dead of night with a destroyer in the
Molokai channel and several men died when the destroyer was almost cut
in half. Every day aboard that ship was exactly like a scene right out of Mr.
Roberts. I struck for quartermaster (navigation specialist) and managed to
advance to the rank of second class petty officer despite the obvious
22 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE
obstacles.
I made two WESTPAC tours aboard the Tombigbee. They included a 
total of 12 months off the coast of Vietnam. We came under machine-gun 
fire while anchored off Chu Lai. We had to do an emergency breakaway 
and leave the harbor. All we needed was one tracer round in one of the 
tanks, and KA-BOOM, it would have been all over. The Viet Cong gunner 
probably got busted because the stupid jerk missed the whole damn ship. 
HOW CAN YOU MISS A WHOLE SHIP?
The only other time I felt threatened was when we went up to a small 
outpost at the DM2 called Cua Viet. It was a vision right out of hell. Cua 
Viet sat on the southern bank at the river mouth of the Thack Han river. We 
rode at anchor and pumped fuel ashore through a bottom lay line. Every 
night we could see the tracers from fire fights raging up and down the river 
and along the DMZ. It was a real hot spot. Every once in awhile Viet Cong 
or NVA rockets would slam into the camp. We would perform an emergency breakaway and put to sea until the all clear was sounded.
Everything was cool until our whacko Captain decided we were going 
into the river mouth. Did you ever try to put a pencil through the eye of a 
needle? Thaf s about comparable to what we did. I'll never know how we 
got that big ship through the narrow mouth of that river with no navigational references whatsoever. We dropped anchor midchannel and the 
Captain backed the ship right up to the beach and dropped the stern 
anchor into the sand. There we sat, a great big target full of gasoline. We 
were helpless in the mouth of a narrow river, with three anchors out, right 
in the middle of one of the hottest combat zones in Vietnam. That night 
several men in the crew wrote letters to the Chief of Naval Operations 
requesting an immediate transfer. No one slept. I don't know why the 
enemy didn't send in the rockets, but they didn't. I knew then that God 
must keep a special watch over fools. The next day we set to sea and 
started for Pearl. The Captain was relieved for incompetence later that 
year. Then I was transferred to school.
I didn't know what school I had drawn. It turned out to be the Naval 
Security and Intelligence School for Internal Security Specialist (NEC 9545). 
The general training prepared me to set up security perimeters, secure 
installations and buildings, and safeguard classified information. My 
training included special weapons, booby-trap identification and disarming, the detection of bugs, phone taps, transmitters and many other subjects. I was specifically trained to prepare and conduct Pacific-area 
intelligence briefings. From the day I reported to school in 1968 until I left 
the Navy I worked off and on for Naval Security and Intelligence,
Upon graduating I was transferred to Vietnam. I had volunteered
William Cooper • 23
over a year before because I figured that my chances were better in the war 
than they were on that screwed-up gasoline tanker. This was the first good 
news I'd had since leaving boot camp. I really wanted to fight for my 
country. I wasn't to find out what a real fool I was until a few years later.
I landed at Da Nang and was bused to Camp Carter, the headquarters 
for Naval Security and Intelligence in I Corps. I was interviewed by 
Captain Carter, the commanding officer. The names turned out to be a 
coincidence. Captain Carter asked me if I thought I would make a good 
patrol boat captain, and I told him that I would. What else could I tell him? 
I thought he was joking when he told me I would have command of a boat 
and crew. He wasn't, and I did. Lt. Duey at the Harbor Patrol, a division 
of Naval Intelligence, allowed me to hand-pick a crew. He gave me first 
choice of four 45-foot picket boats that had just been unloaded from the 
deck of a freighter. I and my new crew spent three days going over every 
inch of that boat. We adjusted and fine-tuned everything. We sanded and 
painted. One of the seamen even hung curtains in the after cabin. We 
checked and double-checked the engines. My gunners mate, GMG3 
Robert G. Barron, checked out weapons and we began to arm our vessel. 
I've got to tell you the truth — just looking at all those guns scared the shit 
out of me. I vowed right then and there that I would be the best damn 
captain that ever commanded a combat vessel in wartime. I learned to 
exist an only 2 or 3 hours of sleep out of 24 and never ate until I knew that 
my crew had been fed.
We spent a lot of spooky nights patrolling the Da Nang harbor and 
river. One night a rocket hit the ammo dump at the river's edge near the 
Da Nang bridge, and it really looked as if the world was coming to an end. 
Another time we engaged the enemy in the cove at Point Isabella near the 
marine fuel farm and probably saved their butts. That engagement was 
reported in The Stars and Stripes, the armed forces newspaper in Vietnam.
The worst moments came, however, not from Charley but from 
mother nature. A full-blown typhoon roared across the Gulf of Tonkin. To 
save the boats we put to sea. The angels must have been laughing. What a 
sight we must have made! I maneuvered our boat in between two giant 
cargo ships riding at anchor off Red Beach and learned quickly what fear 
was really all about. The wind was blowing so hard that none of us could 
go on deck. That meant that the two of us in the pilot house were stuck on
watch and the men trapped in the after cabin had to man the hand pumps.
The windows in the pilot house blew out and the rain felt like knives
hitting our skin. Water poured in, and I prayed that the men on the pumps
would not become exhausted. I could just barely make out the two tankers.
I could tell they were in more trouble than we. When we were on the crest
24 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE
of the mountainous waves we looked down onto the top of the ships. 
When we were in the trough we seemed to be in danger of their crashing 
down upon us. One of the freighters snapped a cable and steamed slowly 
out of the harbor.
The next morning the storm calmed and we moved into the river. 
Debris was floating down and we had to play dodge-the-tree-trunks until 
we spotted a sheltered pier in front of the Press Club. We carefully pulled 
the boat alongside, tied fast to the pier, then collapsed from exhaustion. 
After awhile we drew straws to see who would remain on watch with me. 
The rest went into the Press Club. After a couple of hours the crew 
returned and we went in. It was like nothing was going on outside. 
Reporters sat around drinking or eating. All around flowed conversation 
and laughter. We ordered a huge meal, signed Lt. Duey's name to the 
check, then went out to the boat. I don't know whose name the other guys 
signed, but none of us had any money. I don't even know if Lt. Duey ever 
got the bill. I do know that it was one of the best damn meals that we ever 
had in that country.
The next two days were spent in repairing the boat, cleaning the 
weapons, and checking everything. Then we went to the club, got stone 
drunk, and slept for damn near a whole other day.
Bob Barron volunteered for Cua Viet. I begged him to stay with us. 
Maybe we could all go up later together. He couldn't wait; he had to have 
action. We promised each other that if one of us bought the farm the other 
would drink a bottle of scotch in memory, then break the bottle on the 
rocks. Don't ask me what that was all about. Men who think they might 
die at any given moment do stupid things and I was no different than most.
About three weeks later we learned that Bob's boat had gone on TWO 
LIMA patrol on the Thack Han River one night and had never returned. 
No radio transmissions were ever heard. And for awhile no bodies were 
found. Then one by one they popped to the surface along the bank. It was 
a long time before we ever found the boat. When we did it was twisted up 
like a pretzel. I say "we," because after I drank the bottle of scotch and 
broke it on the rocks, I forced the issue and was transferred to the Dong Ha 
River Support Group at Cua Viet.
It was now a personal war. They had killed a part of me. Bob had 
been my friend. His name is on the Vietnam Memorial. My boat engaged 
the enemy more times than any other boat that ever patrolled that river. 
We kept the enemy off the river and I never lost another man. I was 
awarded the Naval Achievement Medal with Combat V, the Naval Commendation Medal with Combat V, and the Combat Action Ribbon. Our 
whole organization was awarded the Presidential Unit Citation, the Naval
William Cooper • 25
Unit Citation, and each of us accumulated various other minor awards, 
ribbons, and medals.
On a Patrol Boat
One thing I didn't like about Vietnam was that it was very difficult to 
maintain unit cohesion and morale when you had proven and trusted men 
leaving all the time at staggered intervals and green, unproven men arriving to take their place. I noticed that I felt like I was deserting my crew 
when I was rotated home. I tried to extend my tour of duty, but they had 
already decided to phase out our forces and turn the war over to the 
Vietnamese. If I had extended a month earlier, I was told, I could have 
stayed. My attitude at that point was a smoldering "SCREW IT!"
The whole time that I was in Vietnam and especially on the DMZI had
noticed that there was a lot of UFO activity. We had individual 24-hour
crypto code sheets that we used to encode messages, but because of the
danger that one of them could be captured at any time, we used special
code words for sensitive information. UFOs, I was told, were definitely
sensitive information. I learned exactly how sensitive when all the people
of an entire village disappeared after UFOs were seen hovering above their
huts. I learned that both sides had fired upon the UFOs, and they had
blasted back with a mysterious blue light. Rumors floated around that
UFOs had kidnapped and mutilated two army soldiers, then dropped
them in the bush. No one knew how much of this was true, but the fact that
the rumors persisted made me tend to think there was at least some truth
26 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE
in them. I found out later that most of those rumors were true.
I eventually found myself back in Hawaii. This time it was shore duty 
at the headquarters of the Commander in Chief of the Pacific Fleet at 
Makalapa, a hill above Pearl Harbor.
I had carried a Secret security clearance in the Air Force, and Secret 
was required for submarines. When I checked into the Fleet Administration Unit, I was asked to fill out papers for another clearance. I did as I was 
asked. I remember that one of the questions asked if I had ever belonged to 
any fraternal organizations. I looked down the list, circled the DeMolay 
Society, and answered in the affirmative. I was assigned to the Operational 
Status Report office (OPSTAT) under Lt. Cdr. Mercado while I awaited the 
results of my FBI background check for the upgraded clearance.
About six months later I was called into the office of the Chief of Staff 
for Naval Intelligence. I was asked to read the regulations covering the 
Personnel Reliability Program governing those personnel who had access 
to nuclear weapons, information on nuclear weapons, launch codes, and 
various other things having to do with nuclear weapons or anything that 
came under HQ-CR 44. I was asked to read and then sign a security oath, 
which I did. I was then told by Captain Caldwell that my security clearance had been upgraded to Top Secret, Q, Sensitive Compartmentalized 
Information with access authorized on a strict need-to-know basis. He told 
me to report to the officer in charge of the CINCPACFLT Intelligence
William Cooper • 27
Briefing Team the following morning at 0400 hours. I did. What I learned 
during the time I spent with that briefing team is what led me on my 
18-year search that has culminated in the writing of this book. I was later 
given another upgraded clearance in the crypto category and served as the 
designated SPECAT operator when I was on watch in the command center.
On the day that I learned that the Office of Naval Intelligence had 
participated in the assassination of President John F. Kennedy and that it 
was the Secret Service agent driving the limo that had shot Kennedy in the 
head, I went AWOL with no intention of ever returning. My good friend 
Bob Swan is the one who talked me into going back. Later, on June 1, 1972, 
the eve of my wedding, I told Bob everything that I knew about the UFOs, 
Kennedy's assassination, the Navy, the Secret Government, the coming ice 
age, Alternatives 1, 2, & 3, Project GALILEO, and the plan for the New 
World Order. I believed it was all true then and I believe it is all true now.
I must warn you, however, that I have found evidence that the secret 
societies were planning as far back as 1917 to invent an artificial threat from 
outer space in order to bring humanity together in a one-world government which they call the New World Order. I am still searching for the 
truth. I firmly believe that this book is closer to that truth than anything 
ever previously written.
I attempted to leak information to a reporter after my discharge. I was 
forced off a cliff by a black limo in the hills of Oakland. Two men got out 
and climbed down to where I lay covered in blood. One bent down and felt 
for my carotid pulse. The other asked if I was dead. The nearest man said, 
"No, but he will be." The other replied, "Good, then we don't have to do 
anything else." They climbed up and drove off. I succeeded in climbing 
up the bank where I waited until found. A month later I was forced into 
another accident by the same limo. This time I was to lose my leg. Two 
men visited me in the hospital. They only wanted to know if I would shut 
up or if the next time should be final. I told them that I would be a very 
good little boy and that they needn't worry about me anymore. Under my 
breath I swore to spill the beans as soon as I could figure out how to do it 
without unit getting hurt again. It took 16 years, $27,000, a computer and a lot 
of envelopes, but now everyone knows.
I went back to school after leaving the Navy and obtained a degree in 
photography, served as the Chief Instructor of the Coastal School of Deep 
Sea Diving, the head of the Mixed Gas Deep Saturation Diving Department 
and the underwater photography instructor for the College of Oceaneering, Admissions representative for Airco Technical Institute, Assistant 
Director of Adelphi Business College, Executive Director of Adelphi Business College, National Marketing Coordinator of United Education &
28 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE
Software, Executive Director of Pacific Coast Technical Institute, and Executive Director of National Technical College. I also owned and operated 
Absolute Image Gallery and Studio of Fine Art Photography.
In the spring of 1988 I saw a magazine that made reference to a 
document discovered by the research team of Moore, Shandera, and Friedman that outlined the government's knowledge of a downed saucer, dead 
alien bodies, and an operation called Operation MAJESTIC TWELVE. I 
knew that Moore and Friedman were government agents and the document was a fraud. I had never heard of Shandera. I knew this because I 
had seen a list of agents who were to initiate a contingency plan called 
MAJESTIC that would lead investigators off the track when such a need 
arose.
I decided that it was time for me to enter the arena and expose the 
cover-up and the disinformation. First it was necessary to convince the 
known agents that I was just a kook who didn't really know anything. I 
prepared some bogus information, mixed it with some true information, 
and passed it to Moore and Friedman through Jim Spieser, the operator of 
a computer BBS network called Paranet. Spieser was told that the information was to go only to Moore or Friedman; no one else was to see it. I 
wanted to buy time by convincing these agents to report me to their case 
officers as harmless, thus allowing me to get the real information out to the 
public. None of that information was intended to go to the public. Spieser 
turned out to be working with Moore, however, and posted the files on the 
computer networks. Spieser then went to Los Angeles, conferred with 
Moore for three days, then returned and barred me from the Paranet 
system.
Friedman called and elicited my address, the name and address of my 
employer, and a lot of other personal information. I knew that I was being 
checked out through the intelligence network and played along. About 
one week after talking to Friedman two Defense Investigative Service 
agents showed up at my home and confiscated all my floppy disks. The 
only thing that prevented them from taking my computer was the fact that 
it was an XT with no hard drive. I knew that my plan had worked, because 
they didn't take me.
With the help of Annie and a few very close and trusted friends, I 
prepared the real information, as true and correct as I could remember, and 
together we did a mailing that, all total, cost me $27,000. We sent the 
packages to people all over the world. That is what prevented the government from arresting me or harming me. Any move by them would be 
interpreted as total confirmation of everything that I had revealed. I also 
uploaded the information onto computer bulletin boards all across the
William Cooper • 29
nation. At the same time I publicly stated that Moore, Shandera, and 
Friedman are government agents and that the Eisenhower briefing document is a fraud. I was attacked by everyone. They insisted that Moore, 
Shandera, and Friedman were above reproach.
I resigned effective April 15,1989, from the college where I was the 
Executive Director after Jaime Shandera was seen poking around the 
grounds. That story is included later in this book. The loss of income was 
a serious blow. Stan Barrington, the head of the college security department, came to our aid. Stan gave us $5,000 to help out. I was deeply 
moved by his faith and trust in me, and so I gave him 24% of whatever was 
to come out of my efforts down the line. Neither of us ever expected much, 
and so far we have not been wrong. I have, however, paid Stan back his 
money, and now whatever he earns is extra. Stan is in charge of printing 
information and the sale of my papers and tapes. Stan Barrington is my 
only authorized representative.
Moore was proved to be an agent when by his own admission on July 
1, 1989, he stated he had participated in spying on fellow researchers, had 
changed documents, had put out disinformation, and had helped run a 
scam on Paul Bennowicz that had resulted in Mr. Bennowicz being confined to a mental institution. Moore stated that he had been recruited by an 
intelligence agency and that he knew he had been recruited. He was a 
witting agent. No one acknowledged that I had been right.
From that point on, my Annie and I were followed and harassed. 
Death threats began showing up on our answering machine. The phone 
would ring several times during the night, but no one would reply when 
we answered. Sometimes a man would deliver another death threat. 
Government cars would park in front and well-dressed men watched the 
house. The strangest people began to show up at our door, sometimes in 
the middle of the night. I purchased a .380 automatic for Annie and a 9-mm
for me. I taught Annie how to shoot, and she will not hesitate to kill anyone
who attempts to harm me, her, or our little daughter.
Annie and Pooh (Dorothy's nickname) are the lights in my life. Annie
and I were married on July 4,1989. Pooh was born on May 30,1990. My
most touching memory of Annie is of the time after 12 hours of labor when
we were finally in the delivery room. She had taken no drugs. She had not
been given a spinal tap. She did everything naturally. She was drained of
energy and was experiencing great pain. She was numb. After a really
hard push she looked up at me with all the innocence and trust of a little
child and asked, "Did the baby come yet?" It was very hard for me to tell
her that the baby had not yet been born, but that is what I did. She seemed
to waver for a moment, but only a moment. Annie quickly regained her
30 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE
composure. I could see the love in her eyes as she looked up at me. I 
squeezed her hand. She took a deep breath and pushed Pooh's little head 
out into the world. The doctor suctioned the baby's mouth, then Annie 
gave her all, a push that seemed to come from her very soul — and little 
Dorothy popped out, announcing her presence with a great cry. I am so 
proud of Annie. She is my hero. And Pooh is my always and forever 
friend.
Anne and Dorothy
William Cooper • 31
At one point I became very upset with the intimidation. I went out to 
the government car at the curb. I showed the man in the car my 9-mm 
pistol and told him that we were fed up with their intimidating tactics. I 
told him that if he or anyone else wanted to know something about me, 
they should come to the house, sit down, have a cup of coffee, and I would 
be happy to tell them anything that they want to know. I informed him that 
if any further attempt was made to harass me or my family I would not 
hesitate to use my pistol. I then walked behind his car and wrote the 
license number down. He started the car, drove off, and we have not 
detected any overt signs of surveillance since that day.
They did not give up on us. No one knew the location of our new 
house when we moved to Arizona. However, when we drove into the 
driveway, a government car showed up right behind us. The man got out 
and said he was lost and wanted to know who lived here. I asked him why 
he wanted to know. He stated that he was a census taker. He said it was his 
job to ensure that no one out here in the country was left out of the census. 
He asked my name. I told him to get off the property and to not ever come 
back. He protested, but left when he saw that I was serious. (I merely 
asked Annie to get my pistol out of the car.) Now, many people would say 
that I was paranoid in this instance — until they discover that census 
takers DO NOT DRIVE GOVERNMENT CARS.
I was at the post office one morning when a county sheriff's deputy 
asked the clerk at the window next to the one where I was buying stamps 
if "William Cooper" had rented a box. I smiled as the clerk handed him my 
rental agreement and he copied the information. He didn't learn anything, 
as we live in the country where there are no addresses. The form had only 
"Stolen Blvd." listed — a lot of people live on Stolen Boulevard.
We have been taken advantage of by every crooked con man, TV 
producer, scriptwriter, author, and flim-flam expert that there is in this
country. I have learned that the TV and print-media reporters and 
producers that I have met are a pack of liars. They are not objective and 
don't give a damn about the truth. The only really open media left to the 
public is talk radio, and even talk radio won't discuss certain subjects. My 
material has been copied, changed, and even plagiarized. A lot of people 
have used my material to make money without my knowledge or permission. A Hollywood producer wanted to buy the exclusive rights to my 
story for ONE DOLLAR!
Bill Hamilton begged me to let him include my material in his book 
entitled Alien Magic. He pretended to be a friend and I let him. I asked for
no money and he offered none. His entire book consists of other people's 
material. He now accuses me of stealing "his" information. Bill Hamilton
32 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE
turned out to be just another UFO flake. I have since learned that I am not 
the only person of whom he has taken advantage.
The most damaging scam was perpetrated by two old, has-been actors 
turned con men, named Michael Callan and Douglas Deane. I doubt 
seriously that you will remember either one, Callan was a regular in the 
cheapy teen beach-blanket movies and Deane never got beyond bit parts 
and chorus lines. I got involved with them when another actor named 
Bruce Reed called and asked if I would consent to meet with him and a 
friend who preferred to remain anonymous. I agreed that they could come 
to the house where we could talk on familiar turf. I was not eager to meet 
with someone that I did not know, and especially with an anonymous 
person away from familiar surroundings.
Reed and friend showed up at my home, and the friend turned out to 
be Michael Callan. They told me that they had read my material and 
wanted to help. What a joke that statement turned out to be! They told me 
that they knew how to get me in front of millions of people where I could 
deliver my message. Callan was slick; he told me he was only interested in 
helping spread the information, but talked me into signing a five-year 
management contract that gave him a full 20% of the gross of all of my 
earnings no matter what the source. He swore that if he didn't show 
results within six months he would tear up the contract.
The first thing that Callan did was shaft his partner, Bruce Reed. He 
cut Reed out of the action. To prevent me from finding out that he had 
done it only to get Reed's half of the 20%, Callan told me that Bruce was a 
drug dealer. Callan said that the public would find out eventually, and 
Reed's drug involvement would damage me. Everything Callan told me 
about Reed turned out to be a lie.
Stan Barrington called me next, wanting to know why I was trying to 
dump him. I didn't know what he was talking about. It turned out that 
Callan was trying to force Stan into giving up his 24% so that Callan could 
form a 50-50 partnership with me. I told Stan that I had no intention of 
dumping him. I told him that his 24% was his, that he could keep it, sell it, 
or give it away and that he did not need my permission. Stan felt much 
better after that conversation and told Callan to go fly a kite. At that point 
Callan began working on me to get rid of Stan. I refused. I also told him 
that he had nothing invested and therefore did not warrant anything. His 
job was to manage according to our contract.
Douglas Deane entered the picture at the January 7,1989, lecture that 
I gave at the Showboat Hotel and Casino in Las Vegas. Callan brought him 
to videotape the lecture so that we would have a tape to sell for those 
thousands of people who pleaded with us to produce a tape. The agree-
William Cooper • 33
ment was that he would tape the event and the tapes would belong exclusively to me. In return, if the tapes turned out good, Deane would get a 
contract to produce future tapes. The tapes were terrible and I told both 
Deane and Callan that I did not want tapes of that poor quality being sold 
to anyone. They did it anyway behind my back and began the process of 
stealing my master tapes from all of my other lectures. At the same time 
Callan drained all the business accounts. He borrowed $1400 from Stan to 
produce tapes and then kept the money and the tapes.
A producer in Germany booked me to do a lecture in that country. To 
secure the agreement he sent $3,000 to be used for two first-class tickets and 
as a guarantee that when I got there I would not be cancelled. The producer cancelled when a German postal strike prevented him from advertising the event. Callan kept the man's $3,000. I did not find out about that 
until after I fired Callan.
At my lecture in San Diego at the Whole Life Expo I found out that 
Deane was selling tapes and asking people to make checks out to "Need to 
Know Productions," a phony company. I immediately fired Deane. I 
informed Callan that we were to do no more business with him whatsoever. I discovered that Callan was telling me that we were having tapes 
duplicated in Hollywood for $15 per tape, but in reality Deane was doing 
it on VCRs at his home in Arizona. I asked Callan to return all of my master 
tapes for all my lectures. He refused and I fired him.
When I got rid of Callan, he had stolen everything that we had. We 
were literally left penniless. He was in possession of all of our master tapes 
from all of my lectures. We were broke and homeless at that point. If it had 
not been for a few good friends in Minnesota, we would not have survived. 
We would be in the streets today. Callan and Deane continue to injure us 
by selling tapes from my lectures. We get nothing from those sales. They 
are the most despicable con men and thieves that you can imagine.
I paid a visit to Deane's home one Saturday morning to ask him for my 
master tapes. He was not home, and after a polite conversation with his 
handyman, I returned to my home. A few days later the sheriff's department called and asked me if I had been to Deane's home that same Saturday. I told him that I had. He asked me if I had tried to break in Deane's 
home and I told him that I had not. He thanked me and that was the end 
of it. I had no idea what it was all about until I was served with a 
retraining order. It seems that Deane's guilty conscience had made him 
afraid that I would return. He slit his own tires, made a report to the sheriff 
that I had done it, and then procured a restraining order from the local 
court. I have never been questioned or accused by the police or sheriff 
other than what I have already disclosed. I believe that their goal from the
34 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE
very beginning was to try and destroy my efforts at educating the American people. They damn near succeeded.
CHAPTER 1
EXCERPTS FROM
SILENT WEAPONS
FOR
QUIET WARS
Copy furnished by Mr. Tom Young 
A fellow Warrior in the cause of Freedom
Excerpts printed word for word exactly as discovered
(With the added comments of William Cooper) 
(Emphasis added by William Cooper)
36 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
The Illuminati's declaration of War 
upon the people of America.
[Above title added by WC]
WC/Author's Note: I read Top Secret documents which explained that "Silent 
Weapons for Quiet Wars" is the doctrine adopted by the Policy Committee of 
the Bilderberg Group during its first known meeting in 1954. A copy found in 
1969 was in the possession of Naval Intelligence.
The following document, dated May 1979, was found on July 7,1986, in an 
IBM copier that had been purchased at a surplus sale.
TOP SECRET



Chapter 1 Silent Weapons for Quiet Wars

Silent Weapons for Quiet Wars
An introductory programming manual 
Operations Research
Technical Manual
TM-SW7905.1
WELCOME ABOARD
This publication marks the 25th anniversary of the Third World War, 
called the "Quiet War/' being conducted using subjective biological warfare, fought with "silent weapons."
This book contains an introductory description of this war, its strategies, and its weaponry.
May 1979 #74-1120
SECURITY
It is patently impossible to discuss social engineering or the automation of a society, i.e., the engineering of social automation systems (SILENT 
WEAPONS) on a NATIONAL or WORLDWIDE SCALE without implying 
extensive OBJECTIVES of SOCIAL CONTROL and DESTRUCTION OF 
HUMAN LIFE, i.e., SLAVERY and GENOCIDE.
This manual is in itself an analog declaration of intent. Such a writing 
must be SECURED FROM PUBLIC SCRUTINY. Otherwise, it might be 
recognized as a TECHNICALLY FORMAL DECLARATION OF DOMESTIC WAR. Furthermore, whenever any person or group of persons in a
Chapter One Silent Weapons for Quiet Wars • 37
position of great power and WITHOUT FULL KNOWLEDGE and CONSENT OF THE PUBLIC, USES SUCH KNOWLEDGE and METHODOLOGY FOR ECONOMIC CONQUEST —it must be understood that A 
STATE OF DOMESTIC WARFARE EXISTS between said person or group 
of persons and the public.
The SOLUTION of today's PROBLEMS REQUIRES an approach 
which is RUTHLESSLY CANDID, with NO AGONIZING OVER RELIGIOUS, MORAL or CULTURAL VALUES.
YOU have QUALIFIED for this project BECAUSE of your ABILITY to 
LOOK at HUMAN SOCIETY with COLD OBJECTIVITY, and yet analyze 
and DISCUSS your OBSERVATIONS and CONCLUSIONS with OTHERS 
of similar INTELLECTUAL capacity WITHOUT a LOSS of DISCRETION 
or HUMILITY. Such virtues are exercised in your own best interest. Do not 
deviate from them.
WC/Author's Note: All above emphases are mine as are those in the following 
two sections and including bracketed additions throughout.
I do recognize this document, based upon the document's own admission, as a 
formal Declaration of War by the Illuminati upon the Citizens of the United 
States of America. I acknowledge that a State of War exists and has existed 
between the Citizens of the United States of America and the Illuminati 
aggressor based upon this recognition. I present to you that the peaceful 
Citizens of this nation are fully justified in taking whatever steps may be 
neccessary, including violence, to identify, counterattack, and destroy the 
enemy. I base this statement upon the God-given right of any peaceful people 
to defend themselves against attack and destruction by any enemy waging 
war against them. I cite the principles outlined in the Declaration of Independence, the Constitution of the United States of America, and the fully 
recognized and acknowledged historical precedents that have served as the 
justification for destruction of tyrants.
HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION
Silent weapon technology has evolved from Operations Research
(O.R.), a strategic and tactical methodology developed under the MILITARY MANAGEMENT [Eisenhower] in England during World War II.
The original purpose of Operations Research was to study the strategic and
tactical problems of air and land defense with the objective of effective use
of limited military resources against foreign enemies (i.e., logistics).
It was soon recognized by those in positions of power [THE COUNCIL ON FOREIGN RELATIONS] that the same methods might be useful 
for totally controlling a society. But better tools were necessary.
Social engineering (the analysis and automation of a society) requires 
the correlation of great amounts of constantly changing economic informa-
38 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
tion (data), so a high-speed computerized data-processing system was 
necessary which could race ahead of the society and predict when society 
would arrive for capitulation.
Relay computers were too slow, but the electronic computer, invented 
in 1946 by J. Presper Eckert and John W. Mauchly, filled the bill.
The next breakthrough was the development of the simplex method of 
linear programing in 1947 by the mathematician George B. Dantzig.
Then in 1948, the transistor, invented by J. Bardeen, W. H. Brattain, and 
W. Shockley, promised great expansion of the computer field by reducing 
space and power requirements.
With these three inventions under their direction, those in positions of 
power strongly suspected that it was possible for them to control the whole 
world with the push of a button.
Immediately, the ROCKEFELLER FOUNDATION got in on the 
ground floor by making a four-year grant to HARVARD COLLEGE, funding the HARVARD ECONOMIC RESEARCH PROJECT for the study of the 
structure of the American economy. One year later, in 1949, THE UNITED 
STATES AIR FORCE joined in.
In 1952 the original grant period terminated, and a high-level meeting 
of the ELITE [Illuminati] was held to determine the next phase of social 
operations research. The Harvard project had been very fruitful, as is 
borne out by the publication of some of its results in 1953 suggesting the 
feasibility of economic (social) engineering. (Studies in the Structure of the 
American Economy — copyright 1953 by Wassily Leontief, International Sciences Press Inc., White Plains, New York.)
Engineered in the last half of the decade of the 1940s, the new Quiet 
War machine stood, so to speak, in sparkling gold-plated hardware on the 
showroom floor by 1954.
With the creation of the maser in 1954, the promise of unlocking UN 
LIMITED SOURCES OF FUSION ATOMIC ENERGY FROM THE HEAVY 
HYDROGEN IN SEA WATER and the consequent availability of unlimited 
social power was a possibility only decades away.
The combination was irresistible.
The QUIET WAR was quietly DECLARED by the INTERNATIONAL 
ELITE [THE BILDERBERG GROUP] at a meeting held in 1954.
Although the silent weapons system was nearly exposed 13 years 
later, the evolution of the new weapon-system has never suffered any 
major setbacks.
This volume marks the 25th anniversary of the beginning of the Quiet 
War. Already this domestic war has had many victories on many fronts 
throughout the world.
Chapter One Silent Weapons for Quiet Wars • 39
POLITICAL INTRODUCTION
In 1954 it was well recognized by those in positions of authority that it 
was only a matter of time, only a few decades, before the general public 
would be able to grasp and upset the cradle of power, for the very elements 
of the new silent-weapon technology were as accessible for a public Utopia 
as they were for providing a private Utopia.
The ISSUE of PRIMARY CONCERN, that of DOMINANCE, revolved 
a round the subject of the energy sciences.
ENERGY
Energy is recognized as the key to all activity on earth. Natural 
science is the study of the sources and control of natural energy, and social 
science, theoretically expressed as economics, is the study of the sources 
and control of social energy. Both are bookkeeping systems: mathematics. 
Therefore, mathematics is the primary energy science. And the bookkeeper can be king if the public can be kept ignorant of the methodology of 
the bookkeeping.
All science is merely a means to an end. The means is knowledge. The 
end is control. [THE END ALWAYS JUSTIFIES THE MEANS.] Beyond
this remains only one issue: Who will be the beneficiary?
In 1954 this was the issue of primary concern. Although the socalled "moral issues" were raised, in view of the law of natural selection it 
was agreed that a nation or world of people who will not use their intelligence are no better than animals who do not have intelligence. Such 
people are beasts of burden and steaks on the table by choice and consent.
CONSEQUENTLY, in the interest of future world order, peace, and 
tranquility, it was decided to privately wage a quiet war against the American public with an ultimate objective of permanently shifting the natural 
and social energy (wealth) of the undisciplined and irresponsible many 
into the hands of the self-disciplined, responsible, and worthy few.
In order to implement this objective, it was necessary to create, secure,
and apply new weapons which, as it turned out, were a class of weapons so
subtle and sophisticated in their principle of operation and public appearance as to earn for themselves the name "silent weapons."
In conclusion, the objective of economic research, as conducted by the 
magnates capital (banking) and the industries of commodities (goods) 
and vices, is the establishment of an economy which is totally predictable and manipulative.
In order to achieve a totally predictable economy, the low-class elements of the society must be brought under total control, i.e., must be
40 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
housebroken, trained, and assigned a yoke and long-term social duties 
from a very early age, before they have an opportunity to question the 
propriety of the matter. In order to achieve such conformity, the lowerclass family unit must be disintegrated by a process of increasing preoccupation of the parents and the establishment of government-operated 
day-care centers for the occupationally orphaned children.
The quality of education given to the lower class must be of the 
poorest sort, so that the moat of ignorance isolating the inferior class from 
the superior class is and remains incomprehensible to the inferior class. 
With such an initial handicap, even bright lower class individuals have 
little if any hope of extricating themselves from their assigned lot in life. 
This form of slavery is essential to maintaining some measure of social 
order, peace, and tranquility for the ruling upper class.
DESCRIPTIVE INTRODUCTION OF THE SILENT
WEAPON
Everything that is expected from an ordinary weapon is expected from 
a silent weapon by its creators, but only in its own manner of junctioning.
It shoots situations, instead of bullets; propelled by data processing, 
instead of a chemical reaction (explosion); originating from bits of data, 
instead of grains of gunpowder; from a computer, instead of a gun; operated by a computer programmer, instead of a marksman; under the orders 
of a banking magnate, instead of a military general.
It makes no obvious explosive noises, causes no obvious physical or 
mental injuries, and does not obviously interfere with anyone's daily social 
life.
Yet it makes an unmistakable "noise," causes unmistakable physical 
and mental damage, and unmistakably interferes with daily social life, i.e., 
unmistakable to a trained observer, one who knows what to look for.
The public cannot comprehend this weapon, and therefore cannot 
believe that they are being attacked and subdued by a weapon.
The public might instinctively feel that something is wrong [ISN'T 
THAT THE TRUTH?], but because of the technical nature of the silent 
weapon, they cannot express their feeling in a rational way, or handle the 
problem with intelligence. Therefore, they do not know how to cry for 
help, and do not know how to associate with others to defend themselves 
against it.
When a silent weapon is applied gradually, the public adjusts/adapts 
to its presence and learns to tolerate its encroachment on their lives until 
the pressure (psychological via economic) becomes too great and they
Chapter One Silent Weapons for Quiet Wars • 41
crack up.
Therefore, the silent weapon is a type of biological warfare. It attacks 
the vitality, options, and mobility of the individuals of a society by knowing, understanding, manipulating, and attacking their sources of natural 
and social energy, and their physical, mental, and emotional strengths and 
weaknesses.
THEORETICAL INTRODUCTION
Give me control over a nation's currency,
and I care not who makes its laws.
Mayer Amschel Rothschild 
(1743 - 1812)
Today's silent weapons technology is an outgrowth of a simple idea 
discovered, succinctly expressed, and effectively applied by the quoted Mr. 
Mayer Amschel Rothschild. Mr. Rothschild discovered the missing passive 
component of economic theory known as economic inductance. He, of 
course, did not think of his discovery in these 20th-century terms, and, to 
be sure, mathematical analysis had to wait for the Second Industrial Revolution, the rise of the theory of mechanics and electronics, and finally, the 
invention of the electronic computer before it could be effectively applied 
in the control of the world economy.
GENERAL ENERGY CONCEPTS
In the study of energy systems, there always appear three elementary 
concepts. These are potential energy, kinetic energy, and energy dissipation. And corresponding to these concepts, there are three idealized, essentially pure physical counterparts called passive components.
(1) In the science of physical mechanics, the phenomenon of potential energy is associated with a physical property called elasticity or stiffness, and can be represented by a stretched spring.
In electronic science, potential energy is stored in a capacitor instead of 
a spring. This property is called capacitance instead of elasticity or stiff - 
ness.
(2) In the science of physical mechanics, the phenomenon of kinetic 
energy is associated with a physical property called inertia or mass, and
can be represented by a mass or a flywheel in motion.
In electronic science, kinetic energy is stored in an inductor (in a 
magnetic field) instead of a mass. This property is called inductance instead of inertia.
(3) In the science of physical mechanics, the phenomenon of energy
42 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
dissipation is associated with a physical property called friction or resistance, and can be represented by a dashpot or other device which converts 
system energy into heat.
In electronic science, dissipation of energy is performed by an element 
called either a resistor or a conductor, the term "resistor" being the one 
generally used to express the concept of friction, and the term "conductor" 
being generally used to describe a more ideal device (e.g., wire) employed 
to convey electronic energy efficiently from one location to another. The 
property of a resistance or conductor is measured as either resistance or 
conductance reciprocals.
In economics these three energy concepts are associated with:
(1)Economic Capacitance — Capital (money, stock/inventory, investments in buildings and durables, etc.) 
(2)Economic Conductance — Goods (production flow coefficients) 
(3)Economic Inductance — Services (the influence of the population 
of industry on output) 
All of the mathematical theory developed in the study of one energy 
system (e.g., mechanics, electronics, etc.) can be immediately applied in the 
study of any other energy system (e.g., economics).
MR. ROTHSCHILD'S ENERGY DISCOVERY
What Mr. Rothschild had discovered was the basic principle of power, 
influence, and control over people as applied to economics. That principle 
is "when you assume the appearance of power, people soon give it to you."
Mr. Rothschild had discovered that currency or deposit loan accounts 
had the required appearance of power that could be used to INDUCE 
PEOPLE [WC emphasis] (inductance, with people corresponding to a magnetic field) into surrendering their real wealth in exchange for a promise of 
greater wealth (instead of real compensation). They would put up real 
collateral in exchange for a loan of promissory notes. Mr. Rothschild found 
that he could issue more notes than he had backing for, so long as he had 
someone's stock of gold as a persuader to show to his customers.
Mr. Rothschild loaned his promissory notes to individuals and to 
governments. These would create overconfidence. Then he would make 
money scarce, tighten control of the system, and collect the collateral 
through the obligation of contracts. The cycle was then repeated. These 
pressures could be used to ignite a war. Then he would control the availability of currency to determine who would win the war. That government 
which agreed to give him control of its economic system got his support.
Collection of debts was guaranteed by economic aid to the enemy of 
the debtor. The profit derived from this economic methodology made Mr.
Chapter One Silent Weapons for Quiet Wars • 43
Rothschild all the more able to extend his wealth. He found that the public 
greed would allow currency to be printed by government order BEYOND 
THE LIMITS [WC emphasis] (inflation) of backing in precious metal or the 
production of goods and services (gross national product, GNP).
APPARENT CAPITAL AS "PAPER" INDUCTOR
In this structure, credit, presented as a pure element called "currency," 
has the appearance of capital, but is, in fact, negative capital. Hence, it has 
the appearance of service, but is, in fact, indebtedness or debt. It is therefore an economic inductance instead of an economic capacitance, and if 
balanced in no other way, will be balanced by the negation of population 
(war, genocide). The total goods and services represent real capital called 
the gross national product, and currency may be printed up to this level 
and still represent economic capacitance; but currency printed beyond this 
level is subtractive, represents the introduction of economic inductance, 
and constitutes notes of indebtedness.
War is therefore the balancing of the system by killing the true 
creditors (the public which we have taught to exchange true value for 
inflated currency) and falling back on whatever is left of the resources of 
nature and regeneration of those resources.
Mr. Rothschild had discovered that currency gave him the power to 
rearrange the economic structure to his own advantage, to shift economic
inductance to those economic positions which would encourage the greatest economic instability and oscillation.
The final key to economic control had to wait until there was sufficient 
data and high-speed computing equipment to keep close watch on the 
economic oscillations created by price shocking and excess paper energy 
credits — paper inductance/inflation.
BREAKTHROUGH
The aviation field provided the greatest evolution in economic engineering by way of the mathematical theory of shock testing. In this
process, a projectile is fired from an airframe on the ground and the
impulse of the recoil is monitored by vibration transducers connected to
the airframe and wired to chart recorders.
By studying the echoes or reflections of the recoil impulse in the
airframe, it is possible to discover critical vibrations in the structure of the
airframe which either vibrations of the engine or aeolian vibrations of the
wings, or a combination of the two, might reinforce resulting in a resonant 
self-destruction of the airframe in flight as an aircraft. From the standpoint
44 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
of engineering, this means that the strengths and weaknesses of the structure of the airframe in terms of vibrational energy can be discovered and 
manipulated.
APPLICATION IN ECONOMICS
To use this method of airframe shock testing in economic engineering, 
the prices of commodities are shocked, and the public consumer reaction is 
monitored. The resulting echoes of the economic shock are interpreted 
theoretically by computers and the psycho-economic structure of the economy is thus discovered. It is by this process that partial differential and 
difference matrices are discovered that define the family household and 
make possible its evaluation as an economic industry (dissipative consumer structure).
Then the response of the household to future shocks can be predicted 
and manipulated, and society becomes a well-regulated animal with its 
reins under the control of a sophisticated computer-regulated social energy 
bookkeeping system.
Eventually every individual element of the structure comes under 
computer control through a knowledge of personal preferences, such know 
ledge guaranteed by computer association of consumer preferences (universal product code — UPC — zebra-stripe pricing codes on packages) 
with identified consumers (identified via association with the use of a 
credit card and LATER A PERMANENT "TATTOOED" BODY NUMBER 
[WC emphasis] invisible under normal ambient illumination....
THE ECONOMIC MODEL
...The Harvard Economic Research Project (1948-) was an extension of 
World War II Operations Research. Its purpose was to discover the science 
of controlling an economy: at first the American economy, and then the 
world economy. It was felt that with sufficient mathematical foundation 
and data, it would be nearly as easy to predict and control the trend of an 
economy as to predict and control the trajectory of a projectile. Such has 
proven to be the case. Moreover, the economy has been transformed into a 
guided missile on target.
The immediate aim of the Harvard project was to discover the economic structure, what forces change that structure, how the behavior of the 
structure can be predicted, and how it can be manipulated. What was 
needed was a well-organized knowledge of the mathematical structures 
and interrelationships of investment, production, distribution, and consumption.
Chapter One Silent Weapons for Quiet Wars • 45
To make a short story of it all, it was discovered that an economy 
obeyed the same laws as electricity and that all of the mathematical theory 
and practical and computer know-how developed for the electronic field 
could be directly applied in the study of economics. This discovery was 
not openly declared, and its more subtle implications were and are kept a 
closely guarded secret, for example that in an economic model, human life 
in measured in dollars, and that the electric spark generated when opening 
a switch connected to an active inductor is mathematically analogous to the 
initiation of a war.
The greatest hurdle which theoretical economists faced was the accurate description of the household as an industry. This is a challenge 
because consumer purchases are a matter of choice which in turn is influenced by income, price, and other economic factors.
This hurdle was cleared in an indirect and statistically approximate 
way by an application of shock testing to determine the current characteristics, called current technical coefficients, of a household industry.
Finally, because problems in theoretical economics can be translated 
very easily into problems in theoretical electronics, and the solution translated back again, it follows that only a book of language translation and 
concept definition needed to be written for economics. The remainder 
could be gotten from standard works on mathematics and electronics. This 
makes the publication of books on advanced economics unnecessary, and 
greatly simplifies project security.
INDUSTRIAL DIAGRAMS
An ideal industry is defined as a device which receives value from 
other industries in several forms and converts [it] into one specific product 
for sales and distribution to other industries. It has several inputs and one
output. What the public normally thinks of as one industry is really an 
industrial complex where several industries under one roof produce one or 
more products....
THREE INDUSTRIAL CLASSES
Industries fall into three categories or classes by type of output:
Class #1 — Capital (resources)
Class #2 — Goods (commodities or use — dissipative)
Class #3 — Services (action of population)
Class #1 industries exist at three levels:
(1) Nature - sources of energy and raw materials. 
(2) Government - printing of currency equal to gross national product 
46 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
(GNP), and extension (inflation) of currency in excess of GNP.
(3) Banking - loaning of money for interest, and extension (inflation/ 
counterfeiting) of economic value through deposit loan accounts.
Class #2 industries exist as producers of tangible or consumer (dissipated) products. This sort of activity is usually recognized and labeled by 
the public as an "industry."
Class #3 industries are those which have service rather than a tangible 
product as their output. These industries are called (1) households, and (2) 
governments. Their output is human activity of a mechanical sort, and 
their basis is population.
AGGREGATION
The whole economic system can be represented by a three-industry 
model if one allows the names of the outputs to be (1) capital, (2) goods, 
and (3) services. The problem with this representation is that it would not 
show the influence of, say, the textile industry on the ferrous metal industry. This is because both the textile industry and the ferrous metal 
industry would be contained within a single classification called the 
"goods industry" and by this process of combining or aggregating these 
two industries under one system block they would lose their economic 
individuality.
THE E-MODEL
A national economy consists of simultaneous flows of production, 
distribution, consumption, and investment. If all of these elements including labor and human functions are assigned a numerical value in like units 
of measure, say, 1939 dollars, then this flow can be further represented by a 
current flow in an electronic circuit, and its behavior can be predicted and 
manipulated with useful precision.
The three ideal passive energy components of electronics, the capacitor, the 
resistor, and the inductor correspond to the three ideal passive energy components 
of economics called the pure industries of capital, goods, and services, respectively.
Economic capacitance represents the storage of capital in one form or 
another.
Economic conductance represents the level of conductance of materials for the production of goods.
Economic inductance represents the inertia of economic value in motion. This is a population phenomenon known as services.
Chapter One Silent Weapons for Quiet Wars • 47
ECONOMIC INDUCTANCE
An electrical inductor (e.g., a coil of wire) has an electric current as its 
primary phenomenon and a magnetic field as its secondary phenomenon 
(inertia). Corresponding to this, an economic inductor has a flow of economic value as its primary phenomenon and a population field as its secondary phenomenon of inertia. When the flow of economic value (e.g., 
money) diminishes, the human population field collapses in order to keep 
the economic value (money) flowing (extreme case — war).
This public inertia is a result of consumer buying habits, expected 
standard of living, etc., and is generally a phenomenon of self-preservation.
INDUCTIVE FACTORS TO CONSIDER
(1) Population 
(2) Magnitude of the economic activities of the government 
(3) The method of financing these government activities 
(See Peter-Paul Principle — inflation of the currency.) 
TRANSLATION
(A few examples will be given.)
Charge — coulombs — dollars (1939).
Flow/Current — amperes (coulombs per second) — dollars of flow 
per year.
Motivating Force — volts — dollars (output) demand.
Conductance — amperes per volt — dollars of flow per year per dollar demand.
Capacitance — coulombs per volt — dollars of production inventory/ 
stock per dollar demand.
TIME FLOW RELATIONSHIPS AND 
SELF-DESTRUCTIVE OSCILLATIONS
An ideal industry may be symbolized electronically in various ways. 
The simplest way is to represent a demand by a voltage and a supply by a
current. When this is done, the relationship between the two becomes 
What is called an admittance, which can result from three economic factors: 
(1) hindsight flow, (2) present flow, and (3) foresight flow.
Foresight flow is the result of that property of living entities to cause 
energy (food) to be stored for a period of low energy (e.g., a winter season).
It consists of demands made upon an economic system for that period of 
low energy (winter season).
48 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
In a production industry it takes several forms, one of which is known 
as production stock or inventory. In electronic symbology this specific 
industry demand (a pure capital industry) is represented by capacitance 
and the stock or resource is represented by a stored charge. Satisfaction of 
an industry demand suffers a lag because of the loading effect of inventory 
priorities.
Present flow ideally involves no delays. It is, so to speak, input today 
for output today, a "hand to mouth" flow. In electronic symbology, this 
specific industry demand (a pure use industry) is represented by a conductance which is then a simple economic valve (a dissipative element).
Hindsight flow is known as habit or inertia. In electronics this phenomenon is the characteristic of an inductor (economic analog = a pure 
service industry) in which a current flow (economic analog = flow of 
money) creates a magnetic field (economic analog = active human population) which, if the current (money flow) begins to diminish, collapse (war) 
to maintain the current (flow of money — energy).
Other large alternatives to war as economic inductors or economic 
flywheels are an open-ended social welfare program, or an ENORMOUS 
(but fruitful) OPEN-ENDED SPACE PROGRAM [WC emphases].
The problem with stabilizing the economic system is that there is too 
much demand on account of (1) too much greed and (2) too much population.
This creates excessive economic inductance which can only be balanced with economic capacitance (true resources or value — e.g., in goods 
or services).
The social welfare program is nothing more than an open-ended credit 
balance system which creates a false capital industry to give nonproductive 
people a roof over their heads and food in their stomachs. This can be 
useful, however, because the recipients become state property in return for 
the "gift," a standing army for the elite. For he who pays the piper picks 
the tune.
Those who get hooked on the economic drug, must go to the elite for 
a fix. In this, the method of introducing large amounts of stabilizing 
capacitance is by borrowing on the future "credit" of the world. This is a 
fourth law of motion — onset, and consists of performing an action and 
leaving the system before the reflected reaction returns to the point of 
action — a delayed reaction.
The means of surviving the reaction is by changing the system before 
the reaction can return. By this means, politicians become popular in their 
own time and the public pays for it later. In fact, the measure of such a 
politician is the delay time.
Chapter One Silent Weapons for Quiet Wars • 49
The same thing is achieved by a government by printing money 
beyond the limit of the gross national product, an economic process called 
inflation. [Note: REMEMBER THAT INFLATION IS ONLY THE ACT OF 
PRINTING MONEY IN EXCESS OF GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT. 
THEY COULD BLAME IT ON THE PRICE OF WIDGETS OR OIL ONLY 
BECAUSE YOU NEVER KNEW THE REAL CAUSE. THE REAL CAUSE 
AND THE ONLY CAUSE OF INFLATION IS THE PRINTING OF MORE 
MONEY BEYOND THE GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT.] This puts a 
large quantity of money into the hands of the public and maintains a 
balance against their greed, creates a false self-confidence in them and, for 
awhile, stays the wolf from the door.
They must eventually resort to war to balance the account, because 
war ultimately is merely the act of destroying the creditor, and the politicians are the publicly hired hit men that justify the act to keep the responsibility and blood off the public conscience. (See section on consent factors 
and social-economic structuring.)
If the people really cared about their fellow man, they would control 
their appetites (greed, procreation, etc.) so that they would not have to 
operate on a credit or welfare social system which steals from the worker to 
satisfy the bum.
Since most of the general public will not exercise restraint, there are 
only two alternatives to reduce the economic inductance of the system.
(1) Let the populace bludgeon each other to death in war, which will 
only result in a total destruction of the living earth. 
(2) Take control of the world by the use of economic "silent weapons" 
in a form of "quiet warfare" and reduce the economic inductance of the 
world to a safe level by a process of benevolent slavery and genocide. 
The latter option has been taken as the obviously better option. At this 
point it should be crystal clear to the reader why absolute secrecy about the 
silent weapons is necessary. The general public refuses to improve its own 
mentality and its faith in its fellow man. It has become a herd of proliferating barbarians, and, so to speak, a blight upon the face of the earth.
They do not care enough about economic science to learn why they 
have not been able to avoid war despite religious morality, and their 
religious or self-gratifying refusal to deal with earthly problems renders 
the solution of the earthly problem unreachable by them.
It is left to those few who are truly willing to think and survive as the 
fittest to survive, to solve the problem for themselves as the few who really 
care. Otherwise, exposure of the silent weapon would destroy our only 
hope of preserving the seed of future true humanity....
50 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
THE HOUSEHOLD INDUSTRY
The industries of finance (banking), manufacturing, and government, 
real counterparts of the pure industries of capital, goods, and services, are 
easily defined because they are generally logically structured. Because of 
this their processes can be described mathematically and their technical 
coefficients can be easily deduced. This, however, is not the case with the 
service industry known as the household industry.
HOUSEHOLD MODELS
...The problem which a theoretical economist faces is that the consumer preferences of any household is not easily predictable and the technical coefficients of any one household tend to be a nonlinear, very 
complex, and variable function of income, prices, etc.
Computer information derived from the use of the universal product 
code in conjunction with credit-card purchase as an individual household 
identifier could change this state of affairs, but the U.P.C. method is not yet 
available on a national or even a significant regional scale. To compensate 
for this data deficiency, an alternate indirect approach of analysis has been 
adopted known as economic shock testing. This method, widely used in 
the aircraft manufacturing industry, develops an aggregate statistical sort 
of data.
Applied to economics, this means that all of the households in one 
region or in the whole nation are studied as a group or class rather than 
individually, and the mass behavior rather than individual behavior is 
used to discover useful estimates of the technical coefficients governing the 
economic structure of the hypothetical single-household industry....
One method of evaluating the technical coefficients of the household 
industry depends upon shocking the prices of a commodity and noting the 
changes in the sales of all of the commodities.
ECONOMIC SHOCK TESTING
In recent times, the application of Operations Research to the study of 
the public economy has been obvious for anyone who understands the 
principles of shock testing.
In the shock testing of an aircraft airframe, the recoil impulse of firing 
a gun mounted on that airframe causes shock waves in that structure 
which tell aviation engineers the conditions under which parts of the 
airplane or the whole airplane or its wings will start to vibrate or flutter like 
a guitar string, a flute reed, or a tuning fork, and disintegrate or fall apart 
in flight.
Chapter One Silent Weapons for Quiet Wars • 51
Economic engineers achieve the same result in studying the behavior 
of the economy and the consumer public by carefully selecting a staple 
commodity such as beef, coffee, gasoline, or sugar, and then causing a 
sudden change or shock in its price or availability, thus kicking everybody's budget and buying habits out of shape.
They then observe the shock waves which result by monitoring the 
changes in advertising, prices, and sales of that and other commodities.
The objective of such studies is to acquire the know-how to set the 
public economy into a predictable state of motion or change, even a controlled self-destructive state of motion which will convince the public that 
certain "expert" people should take control of the money system and 
reestablish security (rather than liberty and justice) for all. When the 
subject citizens are rendered unable to control their financial affairs, they, of 
course, become totally enslaved, a source of cheap labor.
Not only the prices of commodities, but also the availability of labor 
can be used as the means of shock testing. Labor strikes deliver excellent 
tails shocks to an economy, especially in the critical service areas of trucking (transportation), communication, public utilities (energy, water, garbage collection), etc.
By shock testing, it is found that there is a direct relationship between 
the availability of money flowing in an economy and the psychological 
outlook and response of masses of people dependent upon that availability.
For example, there is a measurable quantitative relationship between 
the price of gasoline and the probability that a person would experience a 
headache, feel a need to watch a violent movie, smoke a cigarette, or go to 
a tavern for a mug of beer.
It is most interesting that, by observing and measuring the economic 
modes by which the public tries to run from their problems and escape 
from reality, and by applying the mathematical theory of Operations Research, it is possible to program computers to predict the most probable 
combination of created events (shocks) which will bring about a complete 
control and subjugation of the public through a subversion of the public 
economy (by shaking the plum tree)....
INTRODUCTION TO ECONOMIC AMPLIFIERS
Economic amplifiers are the active components of economic engineering. The basic characteristic of any amplifier (mechanical, electrical, or
economic) is that it receives an input control signal and delivers energy
from an independent energy source to a specified output terminal in a
predictable relationship to that input control signal.
The simplest form of economic amplifier is a device called advertising.
52 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
If a person is spoken to by a T.V. advertiser as if he were a twelve-yearold, then, due to suggestibility, he will, with a certain probability, respond 
or react to that suggestion with the uncritical response of a twelve-year-old 
and will reach into his economic reservoir and deliver its energy to buy that 
product on impulse when he passes it in the store.
An economic amplifier may have several inputs and outputs. Its 
response might be instantaneous or delayed. Its circuit symbol might be a 
rotary switch if its options are exclusive, qualitative, "go" or "no go," or it 
might have its parametric input/output relationships specified by a matrix 
with internal energy sources represented.
Whatever its form might be, its purpose is to govern the flow of energy 
from a source to an output sink in direct relationship to an input control 
signal. For this reason, it is called an active circuit element or component.
Economic Amplifiers fall into classes called strategies, and, in comparison with electronic amplifiers, the specific internal functions of an 
economic amplifier are called logistical instead of electrical.
Therefore, economic amplifiers not only deliver power gain but also, 
in effect, are used to cause changes in the economic circuitry.
In the design of an economic amplifier we must have some idea of at 
least five functions, which are
(1) the available input signals, 
(2) the desired output-control objectives, 
(3) the strategic objective, 
(4) the available economic power sources, 
(5) the logistical options. 
The process of defining and evaluating these factors and incorporating the economic amplifier into an economic system has been popularly 
called GAME THEORY [WC emphasis].
The design of an economic amplifier begins with a specification of the 
power level of the output, which can range from personal to national. The 
second condition is accuracy of response, i.e., how accurately the output 
action is a function of the input commands. High gain combined with 
strong feedback helps to deliver the required precision.
Most of the error will be in the input data signal. Personal input data 
tends to be specific, while national input data tends to be statistical.
SHORT LIST OF INPUTS
Questions to be answered:
(1) what (3) where (5) why 
(2) when (4) how (6) who 
Chapter One Silent Weapons for Quiet Wars • 53
General sources of information:
(1) telephone taps (3) analysis of garbage 
(2) surveillance (4) behavior of children in school 
Standard of living by:
(l)food (3) shelter
(2) clothing (4) transportation
Social contacts:
(1) telephone — itemized record of calls 
(2) family — marriage certificates, birth certificates, etc. 
friends, associates, etc. 
(4) memberships in organizations 
(5) political affiliation 
THE PERSONAL PAPER TRAIL
Personal buying habits, i.e., personal consumer preferences:
(1) checking accounts 
(2) credit-card purchases 
(3) "tagged" credit-card purchases — the credit-card purchase of 
products bearing the U.P.C. (Universal Product Code)
Assets:
(1) checking accounts (5) automobile, etc.
(2) savings accounts (6) safety deposit at bank
(3) real estate (7) stock market
(4) business
Liabilities:
(1) editors (3) loans
(2) enemies (see - legal) (4) consumer credit
Government sources (ploys)*:
(1) Welfare (4) doles
(2) Social Security (5) grants
(3) U.S.D.A. surplus food (6) subsidies
*Principle of this ploy — the citizen will almost always make the collection of 
intormation easy if he can operate on the "free sandwich principle" of "eat 
now, and pay later."
Government sources (via intimidation): 
(1) Internal Revenue Service
(2) OSHA
54 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
(3) Census 
(4) etc. 
Other government sources — surveillance of U.S. mail. 
HABIT PATTERNS — PROGRAMMING
Strengths and weaknesses:
(1) activities (sports, hobbies, etc.) 
(2) see "legal" (fear, anger, etc. — crime record) 
(3) hospital records (drug sensitivities, reaction to pain, etc.) 
(4) psychiatric records (fears, angers, disgusts, adaptability, reactions to 
stimuli, violence, suggestibility or hypnosis, pain, pleasure, love, and sex) 
Methods of coping— of adaptability — behavior:
(1) consumption of alcohol 
(2) consumption of drugs 
(3) entertainment 
(4) religious factors influencing behavior 
(5) other methods of escaping from reality 
Payment modus operandi (MO) — pay on time, etc:
(1) payment of telephone bills 
(2) energy purchases (electric, gas,...) 
(3) water purchases 
(4) repayment of loans 
(5) house payments 
(6) automobile payments 
(7) payments on credit cards 
Political sensitivity:
(1) beliefs (3) position (5) projects/activities 
(2) contacts (4) strengths/weaknesses 
Legal inputs — behavioral control (Excuses for investigation, search, 
arrest, or employment of force to modify behavior)
(1) court records (4) reports made to police 
(2) police records — NCIC (5) insurance information 
(3) driving record (6) anti-establishment acquaintances 
NATIONAL INPUT INFORMATION
Business sources (via I.R.S., etc.):
(1) prices of commodities 
(2) sales 
Chapter One Silent Weapons for Quiet Wars • 55
(3) investments in
(a) stocks/inventory 
(b) production tools and machinery 
(c) buildings and improvements 
(d)the stock market 
Banks and credit bureaus:
(1) credit information 
(2) payment information 
Miscellaneous sources:
(1) polls and surveys 
(2) publications
(3) telephone records 
(4) energy and utility purchases
SHORT LIST OF OUTPUTS
Outputs — create controlled situations — manipulation of the economy, hence society — control by control of compensation and income.
Sequence:
(1) allocates opportunities.
 (2) destroys opportunities. 
(3) controls the economic environment, 
(4) controls the availability of raw materials. 
(5) controls capital, 
(6) controls bank rates, 
(7) controls the inflation of the currency, 
(8) controls the possession of property. 
(9) controls industrial capacity. 
(10) controls manufacturing, 
(11) controls the availability of goods (commodities), 
(12) controls the prices of commodities. 
(13) controls services, the labor force, etc. 
(14) controls payments to government officials. 
(15) controls the legal functions. 
(16) controls the personal data files — uncorrectable by the party 
slandered 
(17) controls advertising. 
(18) controls media contact. 
(19) controls material available for T.V. viewing. 
(20) disengages attention from real issues.
56 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
(21) engages emotions. 
(22) creates disorder, chaos, and insanity. 
(23) controls design of more probing tax forms. 
(24) controls surveillance. 
(25) controls the storage of information. 
(26) develops psychological analyses and profiles of individuals. 
(27) controls legal functions [repeat of 15] 
(28) controls sociological factors. 
(29) controls health options. 
(30) preys on weaknesses. 
(31) cripples strengths. 
(32) leaches wealth and substance. 
TABLE OF STRATEGIES
Do this To get this
Keep the public ignorant Less public organization
Maintain access to control Required reaction to outputs (prices, sales)
points for feedback 
Create preoccupation Lower defenses
Attack the family unit Control of the education of the young
Give less cash and more More self-indulgence and more data
credit and doles 
Attack the privacy Destroy faith in this sort of government
of the church 
Social conformity Computer programming simplicity
Minimize the tax protest Maximum economic data, minimum
enforcement problems 
Stabilize the consent Simplicity coefficients
Tighten control of variables Simpler computer input data — greater
predictability 
Establish boundary Problem simplicity/solutions of differential
conditions and difference equations
Proper timing Less data shift and blurring
Maximize control Minimum resistance to control
Collapse of currency Destroy the faith of the American
people in each other. 
[WC: Ultimate objective — New World Order]
DIVERSION, THE PRIMARY STRATEGY
Experience has proven that the SIMPLEST METHOD of securing a 
silent weapon and gaining control of the public is to KEEP THE PUBLIC
Chapter One Silent Weapons for Quiet Wars • 57
UNDISCIPLINED AND IGNORANT of basic systems principles on the 
one hand, WHILE KEEPING THEM CONFUSED, DISORGANIZED, AND 
DISTRACTED with matters of no real importance on the other hand. [WC 
all emphases.]
This is achieved by:
(1) disengaging their minds; sabotaging their mental activities; providing 
a low-quality program of public education in mathematics, logic, systems
design and economics; and discouraging technical creativity.
(2) engaging their emotions, increasing their self-indulgence and their indulgence in emotional and physical activities, by:
(a) unrelenting emotional affrontations and attacks (mental and emotional rape) by way of a constant barrage of sex, violence, and wars in the 
media — especially the T.V. and the newspapers.
(b) giving them what they desire — in excess — "junk food for 
thought" — and depriving them of what they really need.
(3) REWRITING HISTORY and LAW and SUBJECTING THE PUBLIC TO 
THE DEVIANT CREATION, thus being able to SHIFT THEIR THINKING from personal needs to highly fabricated outside priorities. [WC all 
emphases.]
These preclude their interest in and discovery of the silent weapons of 
social automation technology.
The general rule is that there is profit in confusion; the more confusion, 
the more profit. Therefore, the best approach is to create problems and 
then offer the solutions.
DIVERSION SUMMARY
Media: Keep the adult public attention diverted away from the real 
social issues, and captivated by matters of no real importance.
Schools: Keep the young public ignorant of real mathematics, real 
economics, real law, and REAL HISTORY [WC emphasis].
Entertainment: Keep the public entertainment below a sixth-grade 
level.
Work: Keep the public busy, busy, busy, with no time to think; back on 
the farm with the other animals.
CONSENT, THE PRIMARY VICTORY
A silent weapon system operates upon data obtained from a docile 
public by legal (but not always lawful) force. Much information is made 
available to silent weapon systems programmers through the Internal 
Revenue Service. (See Studies in the Structure of the American Economy for an
58 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
I.R.S. source list.)
This information consists of the enforced delivery of well-organized 
data contained in federal and state tax forms collected, assembled, and 
submitted by slave labor provided by taxpayers and employers.
Furthermore, the number of such forms submitted to the I.R.S. is a 
useful indicator of public consent, an important factor in strategic decision 
making. Other data sources are given in the Short List of Inputs.
Consent Coefficients — numerical feedback indicating victory status. 
Psychological basis: When the government is able to collect tax and seize 
private property without just compensation, it is an indication that the 
public is ripe for surrender and is consenting to enslavement and legal 
encroachment. A good and easily quantified indicator of harvest time is 
the number of public citizens who pay income tax despite an obvious lack 
of reciprocal or honest service from the government.
AMPLIFICATION ENERGY SOURCES
The next step in the process of designing an economic amplifier is 
discovering the energy sources. The energy sources which support any 
primitive economic system are, of course, a supply of raw materials, and 
the consent of the people to labor and consequently assume a certain rank, 
position, level, or class in the social structure; i.e., to provide labor at 
various levels in the pecking order.
Each class, in guaranteeing its own level of income, controls the class 
immediately below it, hence preserves the class structure. This provides 
stability and security, but also government from the top.
As time goes on and communication and education improve, the 
lower-class elements of the social labor structure become knowledgeable 
and envious of the good things that the upper-class members have. They 
also begin to attain a knowledge of energy systems and the ability to 
enforce their rise through the class structure.
This threatens the sovereignty of the elite.
If this rise of the lower classes can be postponed long enough, the elite 
can achieve energy dominance, and LABOR BY CONSENT NO LONGER 
WILL HOLD A POSITION [WC emphasis] of an essential economic energy 
source.
Until such energy dominance is absolutely established, the consent of 
people to labor and let others handle their affairs must be taken into 
consideration, since failure to do so could cause the people to interfere in 
the final transfer of energy sources to the control of the elite.
It is essential to recognize that at this time, public consent is still an 
essential key to the release of energy in the process of economic amplifica-
Chapter One Silent Weapons for Quiet Wars • 59
tion. 
Therefore, consent as an energy release mechanism will now be con- 
 sidered. 
LOGISTICS
The successful application of a strategy requires a careful study of 
inputs, outputs, the strategy connecting the inputs and the outputs, and the 
available energy sources to fuel the strategy. This study is called logistics.
A logistical problem is studied at the elementary level first, and then 
levels of greater complexity are studied as a synthesis of elementary factors.
This means that a given system is analyzed, i.e., broken down into its 
subsystems, and these in turn are analyzed, until, by this process, one 
arrives at the logistical "atom," THE INDIVIDUAL [WC emphasis].
This is where the process of SYNTHESIS [WC emphasis] properly 
begins, and at the time of the birth of the individual.
THE ARTIFICIAL WOMB
From the time a person leaves its mother's womb, its every effort is 
directed toward building, maintaining, and withdrawing into artificial 
wombs, various sorts of substitute protective devices or shells.
The objective of these artificial wombs is to provide a stable environment for both stable and unstable activity; to provide a shelter for the
evolutionary processes of growth and maturity — i.e., survival; to 
provide 
security for freedom and to provide defensive protection for offensive
activity.
This is equally true of both the general public and the elite. However, 
there is a definite difference in the way each of these classes go about the
solution of problems.
THE POLITICAL STRUCTURE OF A NATION —
DEPENDENCY
The primary reason why the individual citizens of a country create a 
political structure is a subconscious wish or desire to perpetuate their own 
dependency relationship of childhood. Simply put, they want a human 
god to eliminate all risk from their life, pat them on the head, kiss their 
bruises, put a chicken on every dinner table, clothe their bodies, tuck them 
into bed at night, and tell them that everything will be alright [sic] when 
they wake up in the morning.
This public demand is incredible, so the human god, the politician,
60 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
meets incredibility with incredibility by promising the world and delivering nothing. So who is the bigger liar? the public? or the "godfather"?
This public behavior is surrender born of fear, laziness, and expediency. It is the basis of the welfare state as a strategic weapon, useful against a 
disgusting public.
ACTION/OFFENSE
Most people want to be able to subdue and/or kill other human 
beings which disturb their daily lives, but they do not want to have to cope 
with the moral and religious issues which such an overt act on their part 
might raise. Therefore, they assign the dirty work to others (including 
their own children) so as to keep the blood off their own hands. They rave 
about the humane treatment of animals and then sit down to a delicious 
hamburger from a whitewashed slaughterhouse down the street and out of 
sight. But even more hypocritical, they pay taxes to finance a professional 
association of hit men collectively called politicians, and then complain 
about corruption in government.
RESPONSIBILITY
Again, most people want to be free to do things (to explore, etc.) but 
they are afraid to fail.
The fear of failure is manifested in irresponsibility, and especially in 
delegating those personal responsibilities to others where success is uncertain or carries possible or created liabilities (law) which the person is not 
prepared to accept. They want authority (root word — "author"), but they 
will not accept responsibility or liability. So they hire politicians to face 
reality for them.
SUMMARY
The people hire the politicians so that the people can:
(1) obtain security without managing it. 
(2) obtain action without thinking about it. 
(3) inflict theft, injury, and death upon others without having to contemplate either life or death. 
(4) avoid responsibility for their own intentions. 
(5) obtain the benefits of reality and science without exerting themselves 
in the discipline of facing or learning either of these things. 
They give the politicians the power to create and manage a war 
machine to:
Chapter One Silent Weapons for Quiet Wars • 61 
(1) provide for the survival of the NATION/WOMB. 
(2) prevent encroachment of anything upon the NATION/WOMB. 
(3) destroy the enemy who threatens the NATION /WOMB. 
(4) destroy those citizens of their own country who do not conform for 
the sake of stability of the NATION/WOMB. 
Politicians hold many quasi-military jobs, the lowest being the police 
which are soldiers, the attorneys and the C.P.A.S next who are spies and 
saboteurs (licensed), and the judges who shout the orders and run the 
closed union military shop for whatever the market will bear. The generals 
are industrialists. The "presidential" level of commander-in-chief is shared 
by the international bankers. The people know that they have created this 
farce and financed it with their own taxes (consent), but they would rather 
knuckle under than be the hypocrite. 
Thus, a nation becomes divided into two very distinct parts, a DOCILE SUB-NATION [great silent majority] and a POLITICAL SUB-NATION. 
The political sub-nation remains attached to the docile sub-nation, tolerates 
it, and leaches its substance until it grows strong enough to detach itself 
and then devour its parent.
SYSTEM ANALYSIS
In order to make meaningful computerized economic decisions about 
war, the primary economic flywheel, it is necessary to assign concrete 
logistical values to each element of the war structure — personnel and 
material alike.
This process begins with a clear and candid description of the subsysterms of such a structure.
THE DRAFT
(As military service) 
Few efforts of human behavior modification are more remarkable or 
more effective than that of the socio-military institution known as the draft. 
A primary purpose of a draft or other such institution is to instill, by 
intimidation, in the young males of a society the uncritical conviction that 
the government is omnipotent. [WC Note: The truth is just the opposite, as 
government exists only with the consent of the people.] He is soon taught that a 
prayer is slow to reverse what a bullet can do in an instant. Thus, a man 
trained in a religious environment for eighteen years of his life can, by this 
instrument of the government, be broken down, be purged of his fantasies 
and delusions in a matter of mere months. Once that conviction is instilled, 
all else becomes easy to instill.
62 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
EVEN MORE INTERESTING IS THE PROCESS BY WHICH A 
YOUNG MAN'S PARENTS, WHO PURPORTEDLY LOVE HIM, CAN BE 
INDUCED TO SEND HIM OFF TO WAR TO HIS DEATH [WC emphasis]. 
Although the scope of this work will not allow this matter to be expanded 
in full detail, nevertheless, a coarse overview will be possible and can serve 
to reveal those factors which must be included in some numerical form in 
a computer analysis of social and war systems.
We begin with a tentative definition of the draft. THE DRAFT (selective service, etc.) is an institution of COMPULSORY collective SACRIFICE 
and SLAVERY, devised by the middle-aged and the elderly for the purpose 
of pressing the young into doing the public dirty work. It further serves to 
make the youth as guilty as the elders, thus making criticism of the elders 
by the youth less likely (Generational Stabilizer). It is marketed and sold to 
the public under the label of "patriotic = national" service.
Once a candid economic definition of the draft is achieved, that definition is used to outline the boundaries of a structure called a Human Value 
System, which in turn is translated into the terms of game theory. The 
value of such a slave laborer is given in a Table of Human Values, a table 
broken down into categories by intellect, experience, post-service job 
demand, etc.
Some of these categories are ordinary and can be tentatively evaluated 
in terms of the value of certain jobs for which a known fee exists. Some jobs 
are harder to value because they are unique to the demands of social 
subversion, for an extreme example: the value of a mother's instruction to 
her daughter, causing that daughter to put certain behavioral demands 
upon a future husband ten or fifteen years hence; thus, by suppressing his 
resistance to a perversion of a government, making it easier for a banking 
cartel to buy the State of New York in, say, twenty years.
Such a problem leans heavily upon the observations and data of 
wartime espionage and many types of psychological testing. But crude 
mathematical models (algorithms, etc.) can be devised, if not to predict, at 
least to predetermine these events with maximum certainty. What does 
not exist by natural cooperation is thus enhanced by calculated compulsion. Human beings are machines, levers which may be grasped and 
turned, and there is little real difference between automating a society and 
automating a shoe factory.
These derived values are variable. (It is necessary to use a current 
Table of Human Values for computer analysis.) These values are given in 
true measure rather than U.S. dollars, since the latter is unstable, being 
presently inflated beyond the production of national goods and services so 
as to give the economy a false kinetic energy ("paper" inductance).
Chapter One Silent Weapons for Quiet Wars • 63
The silver value is stable, it being possible to buy the same amount 
with a gram of silver today as could be bought in 1920. Human value 
measured in silver units changes slightly due to changes in production 
technology.
ENFORCEMENT
FACTOR I
As in every social system approach, stability is achieved only by 
understanding and accounting for human nature (action/reaction patterns). A failure to do so can be, and usually is, disastrous.
As in other human social schemes, one form or another of intimidation 
(or incentive) is essential to the success of the draft. Physical principles of 
action and reaction must be applied to both internal and external subsysterms.
To secure the draft, individual brainwashing/programming and both
the family unit and the peer group must be engaged and brought under
control.
FACTOR II— FATHER
The man of the household must be housebroken to ensure that junior 
will grow up with the right social training and attitudes. The advertising 
media, etc., are engaged to see to it that father-to-be is pussy-whipped 
before or by the time he is married. He is taught that he either conforms to 
the social notch cut out for him or his sex life will be hobbled and his tender 
companionship will be zero. He is made to see that women demand 
security more than logical, principled, or honorable behavior.
By the time his son must go to war, father (with jelly for a backbone)
will slam a gun into junior's hand before father will risk the censure of his
peers, or make a hypocrite of himself by crossing the investment he has in
his own personal opinion or self-esteem. Junior will go to war or father will
be embarrassed. So junior will go to war, the true purpose not withstandFACTOR III — MOTHER
The female element of human society is ruled by emotion first and
logic second. In the battle between logic and imagination, imagination
always wins, fantasy prevails, maternal instinct dominates so that the child
comes first and the future comes second. A woman with a newborn baby
is too starry-eyed to see a wealthy man's cannon fodder or a cheap source
of slave labor. A woman must, however, be conditioned to accept the
transition to "reality" when it comes, or sooner.
64 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
As the transition becomes more difficult to manage, the family unit 
must be carefully disintegrated, and state-controlled public education and 
state-operated child-care centers must become more common and legally 
enforced so as to begin the detachment of the child from the mother and 
father at an earlier age. Inoculation of behavioral drugs [Ritalin] can speed 
the transition for the child (mandatory). CAUTION: A woman's impulsive anger can override her fear. An irate woman's power must never be 
underestimated, and her power over a pussy-whipped husband must likewise never be underestimated. It got women the vote in 1920.
FACTOR IV — JUNIOR
The emotional pressure for self-preservation during time of war and 
the self-serving attitude of the common herd that have an option to avoid 
the battlefield — if junior can be persuaded to go — is all of the pressure 
finally necessary to propel Johnny off to war. Their quiet blackmailings of 
him are the threats: "No sacrifice, no friends; no glory, no girlfriends/'
FACTOR V —SISTER
And what about junior's sister? She is given all the good things of life 
by her father, and taught to expect the same from her future husband 
regardless of the price.
FACTOR VI — CATTLE
Those who will not use their brains are no better off than those who 
have no brains, and so this mindless school of jelly-fish, father, mother, son, 
and daughter, become useful beasts of burden or trainers of the same.
[End of excerpt]
WC/Author's Note: So now you know. This chapter could only come in the 
beginning. Your preconceived ideas had to be shattered in order for you to 
understand the rest of this book. In this chapter you can see every step that the 
elite have taken in their war to control this once great nation. You can see the 
steps that will be taken in the future. You can no longer pretend innocence. 
Your denial of the conspiracy will fall on deaf ears. This book is part of the 
education that will give Americans the weapons needed in the coming months 
and years of hardship as the New World Order struggles to be born.
Many will argue that "Silent Weapons for Quiet Wars" is only a bogus 
conglomeration of words for which the writer has never taken credit or responsibility. Those who do so ignore the self-evident truths contained within 
the document. They ignore these truths because they are an indictment of their 
own ignorance, which they cannot face.
The document, first found in 1969, correctly outlines events which subse-
Chapter One Silent Weapons for Quiet Wars • 65
quently came to pass. It cannot be ignored or dismissed. The document is 
genuine. Its truths cannot be negated or shrugged away. The message is this: 
You must accept that you have been cattle and the ultimate consequence of 
being cattle — which is slavery — or you must prepare to fight, and if necessary die to preserve your God-given right to Freedom.
That last sentence is the real reason why people choose to ignore "Silent 
Weapons for Quiet Wars." People are not ready to admit that they have been 
cattle. They are not prepared to fight, and if necessary die, for Freedom. It is 
an indictment of the citizens of the United States of America. And that is the 
total confirmation of the truth of the information contained in "Silent Weapons for Quiet Wars."
CHAPTER 2
SECRET SOCIETIES
AND
THE NEW WORLD
ORDER
...there is a power so organized, so subtle, so complete,
so pervasive, that they had better not speak above their
breath when they speak in condemnation of it.
President Woodrow Wilson
68 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
History is replete with whispers of secret societies. Accounts of elders 
or priests who guarded the forbidden knowledge of ancient peoples. Prom 
inent men, meeting in secret, who directed the course of civilization are 
recorded in the writings of all people.
The oldest is the Brotherhood of the Snake, also called the Brotherhood 
of the Dragon, and it still exists under many different names. The Brotherhood of the Snake is devoted to guarding the "secrets of the ages" and to 
the recognition of Lucifer as the one and only true God. If you do not 
believe in God, Lucifer, or Satan, you must understand that there are great 
masses of people who do. I do not believe in racism but millions do and 
their beliefs and actions based upon those beliefs will affect me. It is clear 
that religion has always played a significant role in the course of these 
organizations. Communication with a higher source, often divine, is a 
familiar claim in all but a few.
The secrets of these groups are thought to be so profound that only a 
chosen, well-educated few are able to understand and use them. These 
men use their special knowledge for the benefit of all mankind. At least 
that is what they claim. How are we to know, since their knowledge and 
actions have been secret? Fortunately, some of it has become public knowledge.
I found it intriguing that in most, if not all, primitive tribal societies all 
of the adults are members. They are usually separated into male and 
female groups. The male usually dominates the culture. Surprisingly, this 
exactly resembles many civilized secret societies. This can only mean that 
the society is working not against established authority, but for it. In fact, 
could be said to actually be the established authority. This would tend to 
remove the validity of any argument that all secret associations are dedicated to the "destruction of properly constituted authority." This can only 
apply, of course, where the secret society makes up the majority or entirety 
of any people which it affects. Only a very few fall into this category.
Secret societies in fact mirror many facets of ordinary life. There is 
always an exclusivity of membership, with the resultant importance attached to being or becoming a member. This is found in all human endeavors, even those which are not secret, such as football teams or country 
clubs. This exclusivity of membership is actually one of the secret societies' 
most powerful weapons. There is the use of signs, passwords and other 
tools. These have always performed valuable functions in man's organizations everywhere. The stated reason, almost always different from the real 
reason, for the societies' existence is important. It can be anything, but is 
usually fraternal and is found in all pressure groups wherever people 
congregate.



Chapter 2 Secret Societies and the New World Order

Chapter Two Secret Societies and the New World Order • 69
The comradeship is especially important. Sharing hardships or 
secrets has always been a special thrill to man. No one who has ever 
undergone the rigors of boot camp is ever likely to forget the special feeling 
of belonging and comradeship that was shared between the victims of the 
drill sergeant or company commander. It is an emotion born of initiation. 
The most potent tool of any secret society is the ritual and myth surrounding initiation. These special binding ceremonies have very deep meaning 
for the participants.
Initiation performs several functions which make up the heart and 
soul of any true secret society. Like boot camp, the initiation into the armed 
forces, important aspects of human thought that are universally compelling, are merged to train and maintain the efforts of a group of people to 
operate in a certain direction. Initiation bonds the members together in 
mysticism
Neophytes gain knowledge of a secret, giving them special status. 
The ancient meaning of neophyte is "planted anew or reborn." A higher 
initiation is in reality a promotion inspiring loyalty and the desire to move 
up to the next rung. The goals of the society are reinforced, causing the 
initiated to act toward those goals in everyday life. That brings about a 
change in the political and social action of the member. The change is 
always in the best interest of the goals of the leaders of the secret society.
The leaders are called adepts. This can best be illustrated by the soldier 
trained to follow orders without thinking. The result is often the wounding or death of the soldier for the realization of the commander's goal,
which may or may not be good for the overall community.
Initiation is a means of rewarding ambitious men who can be trusted. 
You will notice that the higher the degree of initiation the fewer the members who possess the degree. This is not because the other members are not 
ambitious but because a process of very careful selection is being conducted. A point is reached where no effort is good enough without a pull 
up by the higher members. Most members never proceed beyond this
point and never learn the real, secret purpose of the group. The frozen 
member from that point on serves only as a part of the political power base, 
as indeed he has always done. You may have guessed by now that initiation is a way to determine who can and cannot be trusted.
A method of deciding exactly who is to become an adept may be 
decided during initiation by asking the candidate to spit upon the Christian cross. If the candidate refuses, the members congratulate him and tell
him, "You have made the right choice, as a true adept would never do such 
a terrible thing." The newly initiated might find it disconcerting, however, 
that he/she never advances any higher. If instead, the candidate spits 
70 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
upon the cross, he/she has demonstrated a knowledge of one of the mysteries and soon will find him/herself a candidate for the next higher level. 
The mystery is that religion is but a tool to control the masses. Knowledge 
(or wisdom) is their only god, through which man himself will become 
god. The snake and the dragon are both symbols of wisdom. Lucifer is the 
personification of the symbol. It was Lucifer who tempted Eve to entice 
Adam to eat of the tree of knowledge and thus free man from the bonds of 
ignorance. The WORSHIP (a lot different from STUDY) of knowledge, 
science, or technology is Satanism in its purest form, and its god is Lucifer. 
Its secret symbol is the all-seeing eye in the pyramid.
Undesirable effects of secret societies and their aura of mystery has 
sometimes given them the reputation for being abnormal associations or, at 
the very least, strange groups of people. Whenever their beliefs are those 
of the majority they are no longer considered antisocial. A good example is 
the Christian church, which was at one time a secret society under the 
Roman Empire. In fact, the "Open Friendly Secret Society" (the Vatican) 
actually ruled most, if not all, of the known world at one time.
Most secret societies are generally considered to be antisocial; they are 
believed to contain elements that are not liked or are outright harmful to 
the community in general. This is exactly the case in some instances. 
Communism and fascism are secret societies in many countries where they 
are prohibited by law. In this country the Nazi party and the Ku Klux Klan 
are secret societies due mostly to the fact that the general public is disgusted by them. Their activities are sometimes illegal, thus the secrecy of 
their membership. The early Christians were a secret society because 
Roman authorities considered them from the start to be dangerous to 
imperial rule. The same was true of the followers of Islam. At least some 
of these true believers, working in secret, accomplished what would turn 
out to be for the eventual good of society. The Druseed and Yezidis in Syria 
and Iraq consider the Arabs a dangerous secret society dedicated to the 
takeover of the world. The Arabs today think the same of the Jews. Catholics and Freemasons used to have precisely the same ideas about each 
other.
In many primitive or backward societies initiation into the highest 
degrees of the group involved subjection to trials which not infrequently 
resulted in death or insanity for the candidate. It can be seen that social 
right and wrong is not the yardstick in estimating the value of a secret 
society. In Borneo, initiates of hunting societies, consider it meritorious 
and compulsory to hunt heads. In Polynesia, infanticide and debauch were 
considered essential for initiation into their societies, where the tribal code 
needed members who indulged in these things, as pillars of society.
Chapter Two Secret Societies and the New World Order • 71
Since the beginning of recorded history, governmental bodies of every 
nation have been involved with maintaining the status quo to defend the 
establishment against minority groups that sought to function as states 
within states or to oust the constituted authority and take over in its place.
Many of these attempts have succeeded but have not always lasted. 
Man's desire to be one of the elect is something that no power on earth has 
been able to lessen, let alone destroy. It is one of the "secrets" of secret 
societies. It is what gives them a political base and lots of clout. Members 
often vote the same and give each other preference in daily business, legal, 
and social activities. It is the deepest desire of many to be able to say, "I 
belong to the elect."
Houses of worship and sacrifice existed in the ancient cities. They 
were in fact temples built in honor of the many gods. These buildings 
functioned often as meeting places for philosophers and mystics who were 
believed to possess the secrets of nature. These men usually banded together in seclusive philosophic and religious schools.
The most important of all of these ancient groups is the Brotherhood 
of the Snake, or Dragon, and was simply known as the Mysteries. The 
snake and dragon are symbols that represent wisdom. The father of wisdom is Lucifer, also called the Light Bearer. The focus of worship for the 
Mysteries was Osiris, another name of Lucifer. Osiris was the name of a 
bright star that the ancients believed had been cast down onto the earth. 
The literal meaning of Lucifer is "bringer of light" or "the morning star." 
After Osiris was gone from the sky, the ancients saw the Sun as the representation of Osiris, or more correctly, Lucifer.
Osiris was represented by the sun. 
Albert Pike
How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer...
Isaiah 14:12.
...it is claimed that, after Lucifer fell from Heaven,
he brought with him the power of thinking as a gift for mankind.
Fred Gittings, 
Symbolism in Occult Art
Most of the greatest minds that ever lived were initiated into the
society of Mysteries by secret and dangerous rites, some of which were
very cruel. Some of the most famous were known as Osiris, Isis, Sabazius,
Cybele, and Eleusis. Plato was one of these initiates and he describes some
72 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
of the mysteries in his writings.
Plato's initiation encompassed three days of entombment in the Great 
Pyramid, during which time he died (symbolically), was reborn, and was 
given secrets that he was to preserve. Plato's writings are full of information on the Mysteries. Manly P. Hall stated in his book, The Secret Teachings 
of All Ages that, "...the illumined of antiquity...entered its [pyramid of Giza] 
portals as men; they came forth as gods." The ancient Egyptian word for 
pyramid was khuti, which meant "glorious light." Mr. Hall says also, "The 
pyramids, the great Egyptian temples of initiation..."
According to many, the great pyramids were built to commemorate 
and observe a supernova explosion that occurred in the year 4000 B.C. Dr. 
Anthony Hewish, 1974 Nobel Prize winner in physics, discovered a rhythmic series of radio pulses which he proved were emissions from a star that 
had exploded around 4000 B.C. The Freemasons begin their calendar from 
A.L., "In the Year of Light," found by adding 4000 to the modern year. 
Thus 1990 + 4000 = 5990 A.L. George Michanowsky wrote in The Once and 
Future Star that "The ancient Sumerian cuneiform...described a giant star 
exploding within a triangle formed by...Zeta Puppis, Gamma Velorum, and 
Lambda Velorum...located in the southern sky....[An] accurate star 
catalogue now stated that the blazing star that had exploded within the 
triangle would again be seen by man in 6000 years." According to the 
Freemason's calendar it will occur in the year 2000, and indeed it will.
The spacecraft called Galileo is on its way to Jupiter, a baby star with a 
gaseous makeup exactly the same as our sun, with a load of 49.7 pounds of 
plutonium, supposedly being used as batteries to power the craft. When 
its final orbit decays in December 1999, Galileo will deliver its payload into 
the center of Jupiter. The unbelievable pressure that will be encountered 
will cause a reaction exactly as occurs when an atomic bomb is exploded by 
an implosion detonator. The plutonium will explode in an atomic reaction, 
lighting the hydrogen and helium atmosphere of Jupiter and resulting in 
the birth of the star that has already been named LUCIFER. The world will 
interpret it as a sign of tremendous religious significance. It will fulfill 
prophecy. In reality it is only a demonstration of the insane application of 
technology by the JASON Society which may or may not even work. They 
have practiced overkill to ensure success, however, as the documents that I 
read while in Naval Intelligence stated that Project GALILEO required only 
five pounds of plutonium to ignite Jupiter and possibly stave off the 
coming ice age. Global warming is a hoax. It is easier for the public to deal 
with and will give the ruling elite more time before panic and anarchy 
replace government. The reality is that overall global temperatures are 
becoming lower. Storms are becoming more violent and less predictable.
Chapter Two Secret Societies and the New World Order • 73
The icecaps at the poles are growing larger. The temperate zones where 
food can be grown are shrinking. Desertification is increasing in the tropics. An ice age is on its way, and it will occur suddenly.
Simultaneously a vault containing the ancient records of the earth will 
be opened in Egypt. The return of Lucifer and the opening of the vault will 
usher in the millennium. A great celebration has already been planned by 
the Millennium Society to take place at the pyramids in Egypt. According 
to the January 3,1989, edition of the Arizona Daily Star, "President-elect 
Bush is spending this New Year's holiday at Camp David, Maryland, but 
In 10 years he may be in Egypt. Organizers of the Millennium Society say 
he's already committed to ushering in the next century at the Great Pyramid of Cheops in Giza."
The first secret that one must know to even begin to understand the 
Mysteries is that their members believe that there are but few truly mature 
minds in the world. They believe that those minds belong exclusively to 
them. The philosophy that follows is the classic secret-society view of 
humanity. "When a person of strong intellect is confronted with a problem 
which calls for the use of reasoning faculties, they keep their poise and 
attempt to reach a solution by garnering facts bearing upon the question. 
On the other hand, those who are immature, when confronted by the same 
problem, are overwhelmed. While the former may be said to be qualified 
to solve the mystery of their own destiny, the latter must be led like a bunch 
of animals and taught in the simplest language. Like sheep they are totally 
dependent upon the shepherd. The able intellect is taught the Mysteries
and the esoteric spiritual truths. The masses are taught the literal, exoteric 
interpretations. While the masses worship the five senses, the select few 
observe, recognizing in the gulf between them the symbolic concretions of 
great abstract truths.
"The initiated elect communicate directly to Gods [ALIENS?] who
communicate back to them. The masses sacrifice their lambs on an altar 
facing, a stone idol that can neither hear or speak. The elect are given
knowledge of the Mysteries and are illumined and are thus known as The 
Illuminati or the Illuminated Ones, the guardians of the 'Secrets of the
Ages.'"
Three early secret societies that can be directly connected to a modern 
descendant are the cults of Roshaniya, Mithras and their counterpart, the
Builders. They have many things in common with the Freemasons of 
today as well as with many other branches of the Illuminati. For instance, 
common to the Brotherhood are the symbolic rebirth into a new life without going through the portal of death during initiation; reference to the 
"Lion" and "the Grip of the Lion's Paw" in the Master Mason's degree; the
74 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
three degrees, which is the same as the ancient Masonic rites before the 
many other degrees were added; the ladder of seven rungs; men only; and 
the "all-seeing eye."
Of special interest is the powerful society in Afghanistan in ancient 
times called the Roshaniya — illuminated ones. There are actually references to this mystical cult going back through history to the House of 
Wisdom at Cairo. The major tenets of this cult were: the abolition of 
private property; the elimination of religion; the elimination of nation 
states; the belief that illumination emanated from the Supreme Being who 
desired a class of perfect men and women to carry out the organization and 
direction of the world; belief in a plan to reshape the social system of the 
world by first taking control of individual countries one by one, and the 
belief that after reaching the fourth degree one could communicate directly 
with the unknown supervisors who had imparted knowledge to initiates 
throughout the ages. Wise men will again recognize the Brotherhood.
Can you hear the echo of the Nazi party, the Communist party, the 
extreme right and the extreme left? The important fact to remember is that 
the leaders of both the right and the left are a small, hard core of men who 
have been and still are Illuminists or members of the Brotherhood. They 
may have been or may be members of the Christian or Jewish religions, but 
that is only to further their own ends. They are and always have been 
Luciferian and internationalist. They give allegiance to no particular nation, although they have used, on occasion, nationalism to further their 
causes. Their only concern is to gain greater economic and political power. 
The ultimate objective of the leaders of both groups is identical. They are 
determined to win for themselves undisputed control of the wealth, natural resources, and manpower of the entire planet. They intend to turn the 
world into their conception of a Luciferian totalitarian socialist state. In the 
process they will eliminate all Christians, Jews, and atheists. You have just 
learned one, but only one, of the great mysteries.
The Roshaniya also called themselves the Order. Initiates took an oath 
that absolved them of all allegiance except to the Order and stated, "I bind 
myself to perpetual silence and unshaken loyalty and submission to the 
Order....All humanity which cannot identify itself by our secret sign is our 
lawful prey." The oath remains essentially the same to this day. The secret 
sign was to pass a hand over the forehead, palm inward; the countersign, 
to hold the ear with the fingers and support the elbow in the cupped other 
hand. Does that sound familiar? The Order is the Order of the Quest. The 
cult preached that there was no heaven, no hell, only a spirit state completely different from life as we know it. The spirit could continue to be 
powerful on earth through a member of the Order, but only if the spirit had
Chapter Two Secret Societies and the New World Order • 75
been itself a member of the Order before its death. Thus members of the 
Order gained power from the spirits of the dead members.
The Roshaniya took in travelers as initiates and then sent them on 
their way to found new chapters of the Order. It is believed by some that 
the Assassins were a branch of the Roshaniya. Branches of the Roshaniya 
or "the illuminated ones" or the Illuminati existed and still exist everywhere. One of the rules was not to use the same name and never mention 
"the Illuminati." That rule is still in effect today. I believe that it is the 
breaking of this rule that resulted in Adam Weishaupt's downfall.
One of the greatest secrets of the ages is the true story of the Holy
Grail, the robe of Jesus, the remains of the Cross of Crucifixion, and whether Jesus actually died or if he survived and produced a child. Many
myths surround the Knights Templar concerning these relics, and most
myths throughout history always have at least some basis in fact. If my 
sources are correct, the Knights Templar survive today as a branch of the
Illuminati and guard the relics, which are hidden in a location known only
to them.
We know that the Templars are Illuminati because the Freemasons
absorbed and protected those that escaped persecution of the church and
France, just as the Freemasons would absorb and protect Weishaupfs
Illuminati centuries later. The Knights Templar exist today as a higher
degreve of Freemasonry within the Templar Order. In fact, the Knights
Templar is a branch of the Order of the Quest. The DeMolay Society is a
branch of the Freemasons that consecrates the memory of the persecution
of the Knights Templar and in particular, their leader Jacques deMolay. I
know, because I was a member of the DeMolay Society as a young adult. I
loved the mystery and ritual. I became separated from the Society when
my family moved to a location out of reach of any lodge. I believe to this
day that my association with the DeMolay Society may have been the
reason for my selection for Naval Security and Intelligence.
According to members of the intelligence community, when the New
World Order is solidified the relics will be taken out, will be united with the
Spear of Destiny, and will, according to legend, give the world's ruler
absolute power. This may confirm beliefs passed down through the ages
that describe the significance of these relics when united in the hands of
one man. It may also explain Hitler's desperate search for their hiding
place during World War II. Again I must remind you that it makes not one
iota of difference what you believe. If they believe, you will be affected.
The Knights Templar were founded sometime during the 11th century
in Jerusalem by the Prieure de Sion for the express purpose of guarding the
remaining relics of Jesus and to provide military protection for the religious
76 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
travelers during their pilgrimage to the Holy City.
The Prieure de Sion was a religious order founded upon Mount Sion 
in Jerusalem. The Order set for itself the goal of preserving and recording 
the bloodline of Jesus and the House of David. Through every means 
available to them, the Prieure de Sion had found and retrieved the remaining relics. These relics were entrusted to the Knights Templar for safekeeping. I am amazed at the authors of Holy Blood, Holy Grail and the 
information that they have unearthed. Most of all I am amazed at their 
inability to put the puzzle together. The treasure hidden in France is not 
the treasure of the Temple of Jerusalem. It is the Holy Grail itself, the robe 
of Jesus, the last remaining pieces of the Cross of Crucifixion, and, according to my sources, someone's bones. I can tell you that the reality of the 
bones will shake the world to its very foundations if I have been told the 
truth. The relics are hidden in France. I know the location and so do the 
authors of Holy Blood, Holy Grail, but they do not know that they know — 
or do they?
Adam Weishaupt, a young professor of canon law at Ingolstadt University in Germany, was a Jesuit priest and an initiate of the Illuminati. The 
branch of the Order he founded in Germany in 1776 was the same Illuminati previously discussed. The Jesuit connection is important, as you 
will see later in this chapter. Researchers agree that he was financed by the 
House of Rothschild (the same Rothschild family mentioned in "Silent 
Weapons for Quiet Wars"). Weishaupt advocated "abolition of all ordered 
national governments, abolition of inheritance, abolition of private property, abolition of patriotism, abolition of the individual home and family life 
as the cell from which all civilizations have stemmed, and abolition of all 
religions established and existing so that the Luciferian ideology of totalitarianism may be imposed on mankind."
In the same year that he founded the Illuminati he published Wealth of 
Nations, the book that provided the ideological foundation for capitalism 
and for the Industrial Revolution. It is no accident that the Declaration of 
Independence was written in the same year. On the obverse of the Great 
Seal of the United States the wise will recognize the all-seeing eye and other 
signs of the Brotherhood of the Snake.
Every tenet was the same. Date and beliefs confirm that Weishaupt's 
Illuminati is the same as the Afghan Illuminated Ones and the other cults 
which called themselves "illuminated." The Alumbrados of Spain were 
the same as were the "illuminated" Guerinets of France. In the United 
States they were known as the Jacobin clubs. Secrets within secrets within 
secrets — but always at the heart is the Brotherhood.
I believe that Weishaupt was betrayed and set up for persecution
Chapter Two Secret Societies and the New World Order • 77
because he ignored the rule that the word "illuminati" or the existence of 
the Brotherhood would never be exposed to public knowledge. His exposure and outlawing accomplished several goals of the still-hidden and 
still very powerful brotherhood. It allowed members to debunk claims of 
its existence on the grounds that the Illuminati had been exposed and 
outlawed and thus was no longer a reality. It allowed members to deny 
allegations of conspiracy of any kind. The Brotherhood of the Snake is 
adept at throwing out decoys to keep the dogs at bay. Weishaupt may have 
been a fool — or he may have been doing exactly what he was told.
Weishaupt said, "The great strength of our Order lies in its concealment; let it never appear in its own name, but always covered by another 
name, and another occupation."
Allegations that the Freemason organizations were infiltrated by the 
Illuminati during Weishaupt's reign are hogwash. The Freemasons have
always contained the core of Illuminati within their ranks, and that is why 
they so freely and so willingly took in and hid the members of Weishaupt's
group. You cannot really believe that the Freemasons, if they were only a 
simple fraternal organization, would have risked everything, including 
their very lives, by taking in and hiding outlaws who had been condemned
by the monarchies of Europe. It is mainly Freemason authors who have 
perpetuated the myth that Adam Weishaupt was the founder of the Illuminati and that the Illuminati was destroyed, never to surface again.
In 1826 an American Freemason wrote a book revealing Masonic
secrets entitled Illustrations of Freemasonry. One of the secrets that he
revealed is that the last mystery at the top of the Masonic pyramid is the
worship of Lucifer. We have since learned the secret of the "story of the
murder of Hiram Abif." Hiram Abif represents intelligence, liberty and
truth, and was struck down by a blow to the neck with a rule, representing
the suppression of speech by the church; then he was struck in the heart
wih the square, representing the suppression of belief by the State; and
finally he was struck on the head by a maul, representing the suppression
of intellect by the masses. Freemasonry thus equates the Church, the State,
and masses with tyranny, intolerance, and ignorance. What Morgan
revealed was that the Freemasons were pledged to avenge Hiram Abif and 
that their plan was to strike down the Church, the State, and the freedom of
the masses.
Morgan caused a small uproar against the Masons. The small uproar
turned into a full blown anti-Freemason movement when the author, William Morgan, disappeared. Morgan had apparently been abducted and
drowned in Lake Ontario. It was alleged that fellow Masons had done it, a
claim that they deny to this day. Who else would have done it? I believe
78 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
they murdered him. The newspapers of the time state without reservation 
that he was murdered by Masons. The oath of initiation into the Freemasons states that if secrets are told, the initiate will be murdered. A 
nationwide furor ensued that resulted in the creation of an anti-Masonic 
political party in 1829 by Henry Dana Ward, Thurlow Weed, and William 
H. Seward. Interest in several anti-Masonic books was revived during that 
period, with the result that Freemasonry suffered a severe loss of membership. It lasted only a few years and by 1840 the anti-Masonic party was 
extinct. Time really does cure all ills.
We know that the British Freemasons are a totally self-serving group 
that discriminates in favor of its own whenever jobs, promotions, contracts, 
or careers are concerned. The English Freemason organization was used 
by the KGB to infiltrate and take over British Intelligence. British Intelligence is synonomous with Chatham House, more commonly known as 
the Royal Institute for International Affairs, the parent organization of the 
Council on Foreign Relations in the United States. The English state police, 
Scotland Yard, ordered its personnel not to join the Masons for fear the 
same would happen to them. Of course, you have been told all your life 
that the Freemasons are only a benevolent fraternal organization bent only 
on community service. Read on, O innocent one.
Probably the most notorious Freemason lodge is the P2 lodge in Italy. 
This group has been implicated in everything from bribery to assassinations. P2 is directly connected to the Vatican, the Knights of Malta, and to 
the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency. It is powerful and dangerous. The P2 
lodge has succeeded in infiltrating the Vatican and has scored a coup of 
tremendous significance: the Pope, John Paul II, has lifted the ban against 
Freemasonry. Many high-level members of the Vatican are now Freemasons.
I tell you now that Freemasonry is one of the most wicked and terrible 
organizations upon this earth. The Masons are major players in the struggle for world domination. The 33rd Degree is split into two. One split 
contains the core of the Luciferian Illuminati and the other contains those 
who have no knowledge of it whatsoever.
ALL of the intelligence officers that I worked for while in Naval 
Intelligence were Masons. As I stated before, I believe that my association 
with the DeMolay Society as a young adult may have been the reason that 
I was selected for Naval Security and Intelligence. However, that is only a 
guess.
I had intended to go into great detail linking P2, the Prieure de Sion, 
the Vatican, the CIA, organizations for a United Europe, and the Bilderberg 
Group. Fortunately, Michael Baigent, Righard Leigh & Henry Lincoln beat
Chapter Two Secret Societies and the New World Order • 79
me to it. I say fortunately, because they confirm my previous allegation 
that I published in my paper "The Secret Government" that the CIA had 
plants, called moles, deep within the Vatican. I do not wish to be called a 
plagiarist so you MUST READ Holy Blood, Holy Grail and The Messianic 
Legacy, both by Baigent, Leigh, & Lincoln. Any reputable bookstore should 
carry them. Between pages 343 and 361 of The Messianic Legacy you can 
read of the alliance of power that resulted in a secret world government.
Most members of the Freemasons are not aware that the Illuminati 
practices what is known as "secrets within secrets," or organizations within 
organizations. That is one purpose of initiation. I cannot excuse any of the 
members, however, for anyone who joins a society without knowing
EVERYTHING about the organization is indeed a fool. Only those at the 
top who have passed every test truly know what the Masons are hiding,
thus rendering it impossible for anyone outside to know much at all about 
the group. What does that say about new members or those who are 
already members but do not know the ultimate secrets? It tells me that 
fools abound. Unlike authors who out of fear have acted as apologists for 
the Freemasons, I decline to absolve them of responsibility and guilt. The 
freemasons, like everyone else, are responsible for the cleanliness of their 
home. The occupant of a secret house within a secret house within a secret 
house cannot clean if he cannot see the number of rooms or what they 
contain. Their house is a stinking cesspool. Look to the Masons for the
guilty party if anything happens to me. I believe that they have murdered 
In the past and that they will murder in the future.
I firmly believe that all adult secret societies that practice degrees of 
initiation and consider the members to be "illuminated" are branches of the 
original ages-old Illuminati. Their goal is to rule the world. The doctrine
of this group is not democracy or communism, but is a form of fascism.
The doctrine is totalitarian socialism. You must begin to think correctly.
The Illuminati are not Communists, but some Communists are Illuminati.
(1) Monarchism (thesis) faced democracy (antithesis) in WWI, which resulted in the formation of communism and the League of Nations (synthesis). 
(2) Democracy and communism (thesis) faced fascism (antithesis) in WWII
and resulted in a more powerful United Nations (synthesis). (3) Capitalism (thesis) now faces communism (antithesis) and the result will be the
New World Order, totalitarian socialism (synthesis).
The 1953 report of the California Senate Investigating Committee on
Education stated: "So-called modern Communism is apparently the same
hypocritical world conspiracy to destroy civilization that was founded by
the Illuminati, and that raised its head in our colonies here at the critical
period before the adoption of our Constitution." The California Senate
80 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
understood that communism is the work of the Illuminati. They failed to 
realize that the Council on Foreign Relations and the Trilateral Commission 
are also the work of the Illuminati. You MUST begin to think correctly. The 
enemy is not communism, it is Illuminism. The Communists are not going to 
be much happier with the New World Order than we.
I hope to show that most modern secret societies and especially those 
that practice degrees of initiation — and that is the key — are really one 
society with one purpose. You may call them whatever you wish — the 
Order of the Quest, the JASON Society, the Roshaniya, the Qabbalah, the 
Knights Templar, the Knights of Malta, the Knights of Columbus, the 
Jesuits, the Masons, the Ancient and Mystical Order of Rosae Crucis, the 
Illuminati, the Nazi Party, the Communist Party, the Executive Members of 
the Council on Foreign Relations, The Group, the Brotherhood of the 
Dragon, the Rosicrucians, the Royal Institute of International Affairs, the 
Trilateral Commission, the Bilderberg Group, the Open Friendly Secret 
Society (the Vatican), the Russell Trust, the Skull & Bones, the Scroll & Key, 
the Order — they are all the same and all work toward the same ultimate 
goal, a New World Order.
Many of them, however, disagree on exactly who will rule this New 
World Order, and that is what causes them to sometimes pull in opposite 
directions while nevertheless proceeding toward the same goal. The 
Vatican, for instance, wants the Pope to head the world coalition. Some 
want Lord Maitreya to head the New World Order. Lord Maitreya is the 
front runner, I believe, since witnesses say he was present on the ship at 
Malta with Bush, Gorbachev, and the ten regional heads of the New World 
Order. ''Approximately 200 dignitaries from around the world attended a 
major conference initiated by Maitreya in London on April 21 and 22, 1990. 
Representatives of governments (including the USA), members of royal 
families, religious leaders and journalists, all of whom had met with 
Maitreya previously, attended the conference." Quote from "Prophecy 
Watch" column of Whole Wheat No. 8, Minneapolis.
Someone has also spent an awful lot of money announcing his presence. The Pope will have to approve him if Maitreya is selected, however, 
and that would fulfill the Bible prophecy in the Book of Revelation that 
states that the first beast will be given his power by Rome. If you can 
interpret Revelation as I can, then you know that the Pope will ultimately 
win out and will reign as the second beast.
In 1952 an alliance was formed, bringing them all together for the first 
time in history. The Black Families, the Illuminati (the Order), the Vatican, 
and the Freemasons now work together to bring about the New World 
Order. All will protest their innocence and will do everything within their
Chapter Two Secret Societies and the New World Order • 81
power to destroy anyone who suggests otherwise. I will undoubtedly 
become a target when this book is published.
You may notice that some of those listed in the preceding paragraphs 
do not, or so it appears, practice degrees of initiation. That is the public 
view. Look at the Council on Foreign Relations. Many members—in fact, 
the majority — never serve on the executive committees. They never go 
through any initiation of any kind. They are, in fact, the power base and 
are used to gain a consensus of opinion. The majority are not really 
members but are made to feel as if they are. In reality they are being used 
and are unwilling or unable to understand. The Executive Committee is an 
inner core of intimate associates, members of a secret society called the 
Order of the Quest, also known as the JASON Society, devoted to a common purpose. The members are an outer circle on whom the inner core 
acts by personal persuasion, patronage and social pressure. That is how 
they bought Henry Kissinger. Rockefeller gave Kissinger a grant of $50,000 
in the early '50s, a fortune in those days, and made dear old Henry a 
member of the CFR. Anyone in the outer circle who does not toe the mark 
is summarily expelled and the lesson is not lost on those who remain. Do 
you remember the human desire to be a member of the elect? That is the 
principle at work.
The real power are men who are always recruited without exception
from the secret societies of Harvard and Yale known as the Skull & Bones
and the Scroll & Key. Both societies are secret branches (also called the
Brotherhood of Death) of what is otherwise historically known as the
Illuminati. They are connected to parent organizations in England (The
Group of Oxford University and especially All Souls College), and Germany (the Thule Society, also called the Brotherhood of Death). I learned
this when I was with Naval Intelligence. I was not able to explain why
some members of the Executive Committee were not listed under the
"Addresses" of Chapter 322 of the Skull & Bones Society until I read The
Wise Men by Walter Isaacson & Evan Thomas, Simon and Schuster, New
York. Under illustration #9 in the center of the book you will find the
caption "Lovett with the Yale Unit, above far right, and on the beach: His
initiation into Skull and Bones came at an air base near Dunkirk." I have
found that members of these two societies were chosen on an ongoing basis
by invitation based upon merit post-college and were not confined to only
Harvard orY>ale attendees.
Only members of the Order are initiated into the Order of the Quest,
the JASON Society that makes up the executive members of the Council on
Foreign Relations and, in fact, the Trilateral Commission as well. The
executive members of the Council on Foreign Relations are the real elect in
82 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
this country. George Bush is a member of the Order. Surprised? You 
shouldn't be. His father was also a member who helped finance Hitler.
It is important that you know that the members of the Order take an 
oath that absolves them from any allegiance to any nation or king or 
government or constitution, and that includes the negating of any subsequent oath of allegiance which they may be required to take. They swear 
allegiance only to the Order and its goal of a New World Order. George 
Bush is not a loyal citizen of the United States but instead is loyal only to 
the destruction of the United States and to the formation of the New World 
Order. According to the oath Bush took when he was initiated into Skull & 
Bones, his oath of office as President of the United States of America means 
nothing.
The Trilateral Commission is an elite group of some 300 very prominent business, political, and intellectual decision-makers of Western 
Europe, North America, and Japan. This enterprise is a private agency that 
works to build up political and economic cooperation among the three 
regions. Its grand design, which it no longer hides, is a New World Order.
The Trilateral Commission was the idea of its founder, American 
banking magnate David Rockefeller. The real reason for its formation was 
the decline of the Council on Foreign Relation's power as a result of the 
people's dissatisfaction with the Vietnam War. The reasoning behind the 
move toward the Trilateral Commission was the same as entering two 
horses in the same race. It doubles the chances of winning. The real power 
has always remained solidly in the hands of the Council on Foreign Relations. The Rockefeller family was, is and always will be the benefactor of 
both organizations. Rockefeller, though powerful, is not in control in this 
country or anywhere else. The key to the REAL power is the fact that 
Rockefeller had to put out feelers at a Bilderberg Group meeting in 1972 
about forming a private group of trilateral leaders. The Bilderberg Group 
gave the nod and Rockefeller's man Zbigniew Brzezinski gathered up a 
membership and organized the Trilateral Commission in 1972, not in 1973 
as the Commission claims.
A key to the danger presented by the Trilateral Commission is its 
"Seminal Peace," written for them by Harvard Professor Samuel P. Huntington in the mid '70s. In the paper Professor Huntington recommended 
that democracy and economic development be discarded as outdated 
ideas. He wrote as co-author of the book Crises In Democracy, "We have 
come to recognize that there are potential desirable limits to economic 
growth. There are also potentially desirable limits to the indefinite extension of political democracy. A government which lacks authority will have 
little ability short of cataclysmic crisis to impose on its people the sacrifices
Chapter Two Secret Societies and the New World Order • 83
which may be necessary." The crises and sacrifices he talks about will be 
discussed in a later chapter.
Remember that George Bush was a member of the Trilateral Commission and only resigned as an expediency to get elected. He believes wholeheartedly in the Commission and its ideas and ideals. We have elected a 
President who believes that democracy and economic development must 
be discarded. I tell you now that he is working toward that end. Bush is 
still a member of the Order and the CFR.
The JASON Society, or JASON Scholars, takes its name from the story 
of Jason and the Golden Fleece, and it is a branch of the Order of the Quest, 
One of the highest degrees in the Illuminati. The golden fleece takes on the 
role of truth to JASON members. Jason represents the search for the truth. 
Therefore the name JASON Society denotes a group of men who are 
engaged in a search for the truth. The name Jason is spelled with capital 
letters when used as the name of the JASON Society. Lower-case letters are 
never used when referring to this secret group.
Author's note: The name may even have a deeper meaning, as the name 
"Jason" and the Golden Fleece appear throughout history in relation to various other secret societies. In these instances the story represents man (Jason) 
looking for himself (Golden Fleece).
Top Secret documents that I read while with Naval Intelligence stated 
that President Eisenhower had commissioned the JASON Society to examine all of the evidence, facts, lies, and deception and find the truth of the 
alien question.
Founders of the JASON Group (not the same as the JASON Society)
include members of the famous Manhattan Project, which brought
together almost every leading physicist in the nation to build the atomic
bomb during World War II. The group is made up mostly of theoretical
physicists and is the most elite gathering of scientific minds in the United
States. As of 1987 the membership included four Nobel Prize winners.
Today JASON continues to offer scientific help the government cannot find
anywhere else. They are probably the only group of scientists in the United
States that know the true state of highest technology.
JASON is shrouded in what appears to be unnecessary secrecy. The
group refuses to release its membership list. None of the members list
JASON membership on their official resumes. Working completely behind
the scenes, JASON has guided the nation's most important security decisions. These include, but are not limited to, Star Wars, submarine warfare,
and predictions about the greenhouse effect. The JASON members are
each paid a $500-per-day consultant's fee.
In the documents that I read while with Naval Intelligence the
84 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
JASONS predicted that the greenhouse effect would lead ultimately to an 
ICE AGE.
According to the Pentagon, the JASONS hold the highest and most 
restrictive security clearances in the nation. They are given the protocol 
rank of rear admiral (two stars) when they visit or travel aboard ships or 
visit military bases. The only other reference to the JASON group that I 
have been able to find is in The Pentagon Papers. The papers stated that 
JASON was responsible for designing the electronic barrier between North 
and South Vietnam for the purpose of sealing off infiltration of the South by 
North Vietnamese regulars during the Vietnam War. I was stationed on the 
DMZ and I can tell you that it did not work.
The veil of secrecy drawn around the JASON Group has been so tight 
and so leak-proof since its conception that those who think the government 
cannot keep a secret need to reexamine that position. The government was 
able to contain the JASON secret except for the one leak; but the JASON 
Group itself, a civilian group, did even better. No leaks have ever occurred 
from within JASON. JASON is administered by the Mitre Corporation. 
Government contracts allotted to the Mitre Corporation are in reality allotted to the JASON scientists. This is done so that the name JASON does 
not ever appear in documents which may come under public scrutiny.
What is the difference between the JASON Scholars or JASON Society 
and the JASON Group? The documents that I read referred to the JASON 
Society in exactly those words. In public documents the only JASON 
reference is to the JASON Group, administered by the Mitre Corporation. I 
believe the JASON Society is one of the highest degrees above the Skull & 
Bones and the Scroll & Key in the Illuminati. In other words, it is a higher 
level of initiation. The JASON Group is a scientific organization formed 
and hired by the JASON Society and the U.S. Government for obvious 
reasons.
I know a lot more about the JASON Society and the JASON Group, but 
I do not want to injure Mr. Grant Cameron, who has done extensive 
research on these subjects. He will publish his research in the coming 
months. I guarantee his findings will amaze you.
The Council on Foreign Relations has been the foremost flank of 
America's foreign-policy establishment for more than half a century. The 
Council on Foreign Relations is a private organization of business executives, scholars, and political leaders that studies global problems and plays 
a key role in developing U.S. foreign policy. The CFR is one of the most 
powerful semi-official groups concerned with America's role in international affairs. It is controlled by an elect group of men recruited from the 
Skull & Bones and the Scroll & Key societies of Harvard and Yale, which are
Chapter Two Secret Societies and the New World Order • 85
both chapters of a secret branch of the Illuminati known as Chapter 322 of 
the Order [see page 81]. The members of the Order make up the Executive 
Committee of the Council on Foreign Relations after undergoing initiation 
into the Order of the Quest, also known as the JASON Society.
The Council on Foreign Relations is an off-shoot sister organization to 
the British Royal Institute of International Affairs. Their goal is a New 
World Order. Although it existed as a dinner club in New York, it did not 
take on its present power until 1921, when it merged with the Royal 
Institute of International Affairs and received its financial base from J.R 
Morgan, the Carnegie Endowment, the Rockefeller family, and other Wall 
Street banking interests.
The Council on Foreign Relations controls our government. Through 
the years its members have infiltrated the entire executive branch, State 
Department, Justice Department, CIA, and the top ranks of the military. 
EVERY DIRECTOR OF THE CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY HAS 
BEEN A MEMBER OF THE CFR. MOST PRESIDENTS SINCE ROOSEVELT HAVE BEEN MEMBERS. The members of the CFR dominate ownership of the press and most, if not all, of America's top journalists are 
members. The CFR does not conform to government policy. The government conforms to CFR policy. The appendix contains the most current list
of CFR members that I was able to locate.
I read Top Secret documents while with Naval Intelligence that stated 
that President Eisenhower had appointed six of the Executive Committee
members of the CFR to sit on the panel called Majesty Twelve also known
 as Majority Twelve for security reasons. Majesty Twelve is the secret group 
that is supposed to control extraterrestrial information and projects. The 
documents stated that Eisenhower had also appointed six members from 
the Executive branch of government who were also members of the CFR. 
The total membership of Majesty Twelve was nineteen, including Dr. Edward Teller and the six members from the JASON scientific group. Again, 
whether this is true or disinformation depends solely upon the existence of
aliens.
The CFR is a secret society in that it forbids the taking of notes or the 
publishing of minutes of its meetings. Any member who divulges the
subject or any part of any conversation or talk that took place during a 
meeting is terminated. The goal of the Council on Foreign Relations is a 
New World Order. George Bush is a member of the CFR.
Knights of Malta play a powerful role in this scenario. In the
1930s General Smedley Butler was recruited to help take over the White
House. He was told that he was needed because of his general popularity
with the military. General Butler blew the whistle and named several
86 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
prominent Americans as part of the plot. At the top of the list was John J. 
Raskob, who was a founding member of the U.S. branch of the Knights of 
Malta. He was board chairman of General Motors. He was, at the time, the 
U.S. Treasurer of the Knights of Malta. Congressional hearings were held 
to investigate the plot, but none of those named, including Raskob, was 
ever called to testify and nothing ever came of the hearings. Although you 
will find this in the Congressional records, you will NEVER find it in ANY 
history book anywhere.
It is significant that the Iran-Contra episode has many similarities to 
the 1930s plot. William Casey was a member of the Knights of Malta. 
William Casey, with the help of Vice President Bush, Anne Armstrong and 
Donald Regan, caused the President's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board 
to be emasculated so that Bush, Casey, North and others could carry out 
their dirty deeds without oversight. They had also developed a plan to 
suspend the Constitution of the United States and were preparing to implement the plan when they were caught. These facts emerged from the 
hearings but were suppressed by the committee chairman, Senator Daniel 
Inouye of Hawaii. You must understand that tremendous power was 
involved in both attempts to overthrow the United States Government.
William Casey was the Director of the CIA. He was a member of the 
CFR. Casey was a Knight of Malta. He was the head of Ronald Reagan's 
political campaign. He was head of the Securities and Exchange Commission. During the Nixon administration he was head of the Export-Import 
Bank.
Casey arranged financing for the Kama River truck factory in the 
Soviet Union with 90% of the funds guaranteed or furnished by the U.S. 
taxpayer. This factory built military truck and tank engines for the Soviet 
Army. It was, and may still be, the largest factory in the world and could 
produce more heavy trucks than all U.S. factories together. I believe Casey 
was murdered.
The Knights of Malta is a world organization with its threads weaving 
through business, banking, politics, the CIA, other intelligence organizations, P2, religion, education, law, military, think tanks, foundations, the 
United States Information Agency, the United Nations, and numerous 
other organizations. They are not the oldest but are one of the oldest 
branches of the Order of the Quest in existence. The world head of the 
Knights of Malta is elected for a life term, with the approval of the Pope. 
The Knights of Malta have their own Constitution and are sworn to work 
toward the establishment of a New World Order with the Pope at its head. 
Knights of Malta members are also powerful members of the CFR and the 
Trilateral Commission.
Chapter Two Secret Societies and the New World Order • 87
The Vatican has been infiltrated over many years by the Illuminati. 
This is easily proven by the fact that in 1738 Pope Clement XII issued a 
Papal Bull which stated that any Catholic who became a Mason would be 
excommunicated, a very serious punishment. In 1884 Pope Leo XIII issued 
a proclamation stating that Masonry was one of the secret societies attempting to "revive the manners and customs of the pagans'' and "establish Satan's kingdom on Earth." Piers Compton, in his book The Broken 
Cross, traces the infiltration of the Catholic Church by the Illuminati. He 
has found the use of the all-seeing eye in the triangle by leading Catholics 
and by the Jesuits. It was used in the seal of the Philadelphia Eucharistic 
Congress in 1976. It was on a special issue of Vatican stamps in 1978, 
announcing the final Illuminati victory to the world. Mr. Compton claims 
that Pope John XXIII wore the "all-seeing eye in the triangle" on his 
personal cross. Compton is adamant that several HUNDRED leading 
Catholic priests, bishops and cardinals are members of secret societies. He 
quotes an article in an Italian Journal that lists more than 70 Vatican 
officials, including Pope Paul VI's private secretary, the director general of 
Vatican radio, the Archbishop of Florence, the prelate of Milan, the assis-
 tant editor of the Vatican newspaper, several Italian bishops, and the abbot 
of the Order of St. Benedict. Those are only the ones that are known and 
only the ones known in Italy. It is widely believed that THIS Pope, John 
Paul XXII, is a member of the Illuminati. I believe, according to my research, that it is true. The best indication of infiltration is that on November 27,1983, the Pope retracted all of the Papal Bulls against Freemasonry 
and allowed Catholics, after several hundred years, to again become members of secret societies without fear of excommunication. The goal of the 
Illuminati to elect one of their own to the Papacy appears to have come to 
fruition. If that is the case, the New World Order is just on the horizon. 
Now is the time.
The first U.S. Ambassador to the Vatican was William Wilson, a Knight 
of Malta. His appointment was probably illegal and, for a fact, was highly 
unethical. Wilson could not possibly have represented the U.S. when his 
allegiance was sworn to the Pope.
Wilson, if you will remember, took an unauthorized trip to Libya and
met privately with Libyan officials at a time when travel to Libya had been
banned by the President. President Ronald Reagan had called Gadhafi "a
mad dog" and made a few strong threats. The U.S. had been resolute in
bombing Libya even though civilians were killed. Following Wilson's trip,
Gadhafi issued a press release stating that "an American diplomat had
been sent to reduce tensions with Libya." The State Department denied
that any such thing had taken place. Ambassador Wilson closed his mouth
88 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
and refused any comment. To this day he has said nothing, even though 
his actions made a liar of the United States and embarrassed us worldwide.
A clue to what was happening is the fact that while we had cut off 
Libya and even bombed them and while travel by U.S. citizens to Libya 
was forbidden, five huge oil conglomerates were filling their pockets dealing with Gadhafi. One of the companies was headed by J. Peter Grace, 
President of W.R. Grace. Eight members of the W.R. Grace Company are 
members of the Knights of Malta. According to an article by Leslie Geld in 
the New York Times, administration officials had expressed concern about 
Mr. Wilson's activities. These actions, they said, often seem to revolve 
around his contacts and interest in the oil business.
Wilson should have been fired, but instead nothing happened except 
that he and his wife attended a Papal Easter Mass and stood next to George 
Schultz and his wife. In diplomatic language this indicated private approval of his actions. George Schultz, of course, is a member of the CFR, 
the Bohemian Club and the Bechtel Corporation, all of which have close 
ties to the Order and the Knights of Malta.
Wilson engaged in several other improprieties during his ambassadorship. Again, in each case nothing happened. Finally he resigned. 
Later, if you will remember, President Reagan suffered a fall from a horse 
on William Wilson's ranch in Mexico. Do you seriously think that President Reagan would have visited Wilson's home in Mexico if he had not 
approved of Wilson's actions while he was the U.S. Ambassador to the 
Vatican?
Knight of Malta Myron Taylor was President Roosevelf s envoy. 
Knight of Malta John McCone was President Kennedy's envoy and he was 
also the Director of the CIA during the early '60s. A former mayor of New 
York City, Robert Wagner, was President Jimmy Carter's envoy. Frank 
Shakespeare replaced William Wilson. Frank Shakespeare is a Knight of 
Malta, and so it goes. President Reagan spoke at the annual Knights of 
Malta dinner.
The Knights of Malta ALL have diplomatic immunity. They can ship 
goods across borders without paying duty or undergoing customs check. 
Does that ring any bells? In any case, that is power.
The Knights of Malta is held up by a backbone consisting of nobility. 
Nearly half of the 10,000 members belong to Europe's oldest and most 
powerful families. This cements the alliance between the Vatican and the 
"Black Nobility." The Black Nobility is mostly the rich and powerful of 
Europe. The head of the Black Nobility is the family that can claim direct 
descendancy from the last Roman emperor. Maybe now you can see that 
things are beginning to fall into their proper place. Membership in the
Chapter Two Secret Societies and the New World Order • 89
Knights of Malta entails obedience to one's superior in THE ORDER and 
ultimately to the Pope. Therefore, a U.S. ambassador who is also a member 
of the Knights of Malta faces a conflict of interest. Why is this fact ignored? 
President Bush appointed Knight of Malta Thomas Melledy to the post of 
U.S. Ambassador to the Vatican.
The Vatican has founded the Pope John Paul II Center for Prayer and 
Study for Peace at 1711 Ocean Avenue, Springlake, New Jersey, in a mansion overlooking the ocean. The mansion was given to the New York 
Archdiocese by the estate of Elmer Bobst, who died in 1978. He was a 
multimillionaire and chairman of Warner Lambert Company. Richard 
Nixon was a frequent visitor. Directors of the Center were Kurt Waldheim, 
former Secretary General of the United Nations and ex-nazi war criminal; 
Cyrus Vance, former Secretary of State under Carter and member of both 
the Council on Foreign Relations and the Trilateral Commission; Clare 
Booth Luce, a dame of the Knights of Malta; and J. Peter Grace of W.R. 
Grace Company, who is head of the Knights of Malta in the United States. 
The Center was set up by the Vatican as a part of the Pope's new peace 
plan, which will bring the world together (see my paper "The Secret 
Government"). The Center has two roles: (1) Educate Catholics and their 
children to accept the New World Order. (2) Provide residence for the 
world-peace-solution computer and an ongoing study for peaceful solutions to any future problems which may endanger world peace. The computer is hooked to the world capitals via satellite. All nations have agreed 
to relinquish sovereignty to the Pope and submit future problems to the 
computer for solution. Of course, this will not go into effect until the New 
World Order is publicly announced. I believe that the New World Order 
was born in secrecy on January 19,1989. Now you know.
Acquaint yourself anew with the teachings of Jesus. Compare his
teachings with the tenets of the Illuminati and then compare it with the
following. The Vatican has stated at various times that "the Pope is for
total disarmament; the Pope is for elimination of the sovereignty of the
nation states; the Pope is also stating that property rights are not to be
considered true property rights. The Pope believes that only the Vatican
knows what is right for man."
In the early 1940s, the I.G. Farben Chemical Company employed a
Polish salesman who sold cyanide to the Nazis for use in Auschwitz. The
same salesman also worked as a chemist in the manufacture of the poison
gas. This same cyanide gas along with Zyklon B and malathion was used
to exterminate millions of Jews and other groups. Their bodies were then
burned to ashes in the ovens. After the war the salesman, fearing for his
life, joined the Catholic Church and was ordained a priest in 1946. One of
90 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
his closest friends was Dr. Wolf Szmuness, the mastermind behind the 
November/78 to October/79 and March/80 to October/81 experimental 
hepatitis B vaccine trials conducted by the Center for Disease Control in 
New York, San Francisco and four other American cities that loosed the 
plague of AIDS upon the American people. The salesman was ordained 
Poland's youngest bishop in 1958. After a 30-day reign his predecessor 
was assassinated and our ex-cyanide gas salesman assumed the papacy as 
Pope John Paul II.
1990 is the right time with the right leaders: ex-chief of the Soviet 
secret police Mikhail Gorbachev, ex-chief of the CIA George Bush, ex-Nazi 
cyanide gas salesman Pope John Paul II, all bound by an unholy alliance to 
ring in the New World Order.
The Pope has challenged world leaders by claiming that the people of 
the world already recognize the absolute authority of Rome because they 
observe the Sunday Sabbath that was ordered by the Pope in the Council of 
Laodicea (A.D. 364). The original Ten Commandments given Moses by 
God ordered that we should:
Remember the Sabbath day, to
keep it Holy. Six days shalt 
thou labor, and do all thy work:
but the seventh day is the
Sabbath of the Lord thy God; in
it thou shalt not do any work,
thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter,
thy man servant, nor thy maid servant,
nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger
that is within thy gates: for in six
days the Lord made heaven and earth,
the sea, and all that in them is,
and rested the seventh day: wherefore
the Lord blessed the Sabbath day, and
hallowed it.
The seventh day, the Sabbath as handed to Moses by God, is Saturday 
The celebration of Sunday as the Sabbath is verification that the people 
recognize the Pope as SUPERIOR TO GOD. The only WHOLE people who 
have not recognized the authority of the Pope are the Jewish people, and 
that is why the Vatican has not and will not recognize the state of Israel. 
The Vatican refuses even to call it Israel. Instead the Vatican says Palestine
Chapter Two Secret Societies and the New World Order • 91
when talking about Israel. AGAIN, I MUST REMIND YOU THAT WHAT 
YOU BELIEVE MAKES NOT ONE BIT OF DIFFERENCE. THE IMPORTANT THING TO UNDERSTAND IS THAT IF THEY BELIEVE THIS, IT IS 
GOING TO GIVE YOU NIGHTMARES.
"The Pope has a lot of charisma and in a one world system you need a 
religious head for power. Khomeini proved that. This Pope has enough 
following and charisma to make what we consider a great threat in this 
move." [Quote from The Mantooth Report.]
"Pope John Paul II is most anxious to complete his goal. His goal is to
reunite the Christian World under the LEADERSHIP OF THE PAPACY. If
at all possible, he hopes to reach his goal by the end of this century. This is
the primary reason behind the Pope's many worldwide trips." [From an
article by Gene H. Hogberg, Nov./Dec. 1989, Plain Truth.]
Were you aware that Hitler and his entire staff were Catholic? Did you
know that the Nazis dabbled in the occult? Did you know that the New
York Times of April 14,1990, quotes George Bush as stating, "Lefs forgive
the Nazi war criminals." I wonder why he said that? Did you know that
the Los Angeles Times, December 12,1984, quoted Pope John Paul II as
saying, "Don't go to God for forgiveness of sins, come to me." The Pope
committed blasphemy, thus fulfilling prophecy according to the book of
Revelation. The Pope is telling us that HE IS God!
REMEMBER—NEVER WORSHIP A LEADER. IF YOU WORSHIP A
LEADER, YOU THEN NO LONGER HAVE THE ABILITY TO RECOGNIZE WHEN YOU HAVE BEEN DECEIVED!
On July 21, 1773, Pope Clement XIV "forever annulled and extinguished the Jesuit Order." France, Spain and Portugal had independently
come to realize that the Jesuits were meddling in the affairs of the state and
were therefore enemies of the government. The Pope's action was a response to pressure applied by the monarchies. King Joseph of Portugal
signed a decree "by which the Jesuits were denounced as 'traitors, rebels
and enemies to the realm...'" Pope Pius VII in August, 1814, reinstated the
Jesuits to all of their former rights and privileges.
Ex-President John Adams wrote to his successor, Thomas Jefferson: "I
do not like the re-appearance of the Jesuits. If ever there was a body of men
who merited eternal damnation on earth...it is this Society..." Jefferson
replied: "Like you, I disapprove of the restoration of the Jesuits, for it
means a step backwards from light into darkness."
The Jesuits are still in trouble today as they have been throughout their
existence. On February 28,1982, Pope Paul II told the Jesuits to "keep clear
of politics and honor Roman Catholic tradition." U.S. News and World
Report stated that the Jesuits had indeed meddled in the affairs of nations.
92 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
The article stated: "Jesuits have played leading roles in Nicaragua's Sandinista revolution. Some Jesuits have joined Communist parties. One 
priest in El Salvador has claimed that his order is working for the advancement of Marxism and revolution, not for God....Jesuits have joined leftwing rebel movements in Central America and the Philippines, and have 
advocated a melding of Marxism and Roman Catholicism in what is called 
'liberation theology.'"
When the United States wanted to employ the nastiest forms of the 
Haig-Kissinger depopulation policy in Central America it was the Jesuits 
who organized and prodded the people into civil war. Wherever the 
Jesuits go, revolution quickly follows. I am always sad when I see or hear 
of people being hurt; but according to my research, the Jesuit priests 
murdered in Central America probably deserved it.
The most powerful secret organization in the world is the Bilderberg 
Group, organized in 1952 and named after the hotel where its first meeting 
took place in 1954. The man who organized the Bilderberg Group, Prince 
Bernhard of the Netherlands, has the power to veto the Vatican's choice of 
any Pope it selects. Prince Bernhard has this veto power because his 
family, the Hapsburgs, are desended from the Roman emperors. Prince 
Bernhard is the leader of the Black Families. He claims descent from the 
House of David and thus can truly say that he is related to Jesus. Prince 
Bernhard, with the help of the CIA, brought the hidden ruling body of the 
Illuminati into public knowledge as the Bilderberg Group. This is the 
official alliance that makes up the world governing body.
The core of the organization is three committees made up of thirteen 
members each. Thus the heart of the Bilderberg Group consists of 39 total 
members of the Illuminati. The three committees are made up exclusively 
of members of all the different secret groups that make up the Illuminati, 
the Freemasons, the Vatican, and the Black Nobility. This committee works 
year round in offices in Switzerland. It determines who is invited to the 
annual meeting and what policies and plans will be discussed. Every 
proposal or plan that has ever been discussed at an annual meeting of the 
Bilderberg Group has come to pass usually within one or two years following the meeting. The Bilderberg Group is directing the "quiet war" that is 
being waged against us. How can they do it? These are the men who 
REALLY rule the world.
The numbers 3,7,9,11,13,39 and any multiple of these numbers have 
special meaning to the IUuminati. Notice that the Bilderberg Group has a 
core of 39 members who are broken into 3 groups of 13 members in each 
group. Notice that the core of 39 answers to the 13 who make up the Policy 
Committee. Take special notice that the 13 members of the Policy Commit-
Chapter Two Secret Societies and the New World Order • 93
tee answer to the Round Table of Nine. You know that the original number 
of states in the United States of America was 13. The Constitution has 7
Articles and was signed by 39 members of the Constitutional Convention. 
The United States was born on July 4,1776. July is the 7th month of the 
year. Add 7 (for July) and 4 and you have 11; 1+7+7+6 = 21, which is a 
multiple of 3 and 7. Add 2+1 and you get 3. Look at the numbers in 1776
and you see two 7s and a 6, which is a multiple of 3. Coincidence, you say? 
I say, "Baloney!" and I'd really like to say something a lot stronger. For 
those of you who still say it's accidental, however, I offer the following 
evidence. I could write a book just on numerical links, but I won't.
Manly P. Hall, 33rd-degree Mason, probably the most renowned expert on these subjects, wrote in his book The Secret Destiny of America, "For
more than THREE THOUSAND YEARS [WC emphasis], secret societies
have labored to create the background of knowledge necessary to the
establishment of an enlightened democracy among the nations of the
world....all have continued...and they still exist, as the Order of the Quest.
Men bound by a secret oath to labor in the cause of world democracy
decided that in the American colonies they would plan the roots of a new
way of life. The Order of the Quest...was set up in America before the
middle of the 17th century....Franklin spoke for the Order of the Quest, and
most of the men who worked with him in the early days of the American
Republic were also members....Not only were many of the founders of the
United States Government Masons, but they received aid from a secret and
august body existing in Europe which helped them to establish this
country for a particular purpose known only to the initiated few." I found
these quotes in a book on page 133. When added together, 1+3+3 equal the
number 7 — coincidence? I think not.
We can get a little insight into the Order of the Quest from Franklin D. 
Roosevelt's Secretary of Agriculture, Henry Wallace, the man directly responsible for the printing of the reverse of the Great Seal of the United States
on the one-dollar bill. Mr. Wallace, a member of the Order of the Quest,
wrote in a letter to the Russian mystic and artist Nicholas Roerich: "The
search — whether it be for the lost word of Masonry, or the Holy Chalice,
or the potentialities of the age to come — is the one supremely worthwhile 
objective. All else is karmic duty. But surely everyone is a potential Galahad? So may we strive for the Chalice and the flame above it." The Holy 
Grail has a way of popping up on a regular basis in the writings of secret 
In the Great Seal of the United States we see the ancient symbol of the 
Brotherhood of the Snake (or Dragon), which as you already know is the 
all-seeing eye in the pyramid representing Lucifer in the form of wisdom.
94 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
Just below the pyramid you will note "Novus Ordo Seclorum" which 
translated means, "New World Order." There are
9 tail feathers on the eagle;
13 leaves in the olive branches;
13 bars and stripes;
13 arrows;
13 letters in "E Pluribus Unum";
13 stars in the green crest above;
13 stones in the pyramid;
13 letters in "Annuit Coeptis."
Thirteen is the mystical number assigned to Satan, according to Stan 
Deyo in his excellent book entitled Cosmic Conspiracy.
All of these mystical numbers also have special meaning to the Freemasons. You would have to be a devout skeptic to miss the tremendous 
significance of all of these supposed coincidences. Who among you can 
still say that there is no link?
I read while in Naval Intelligence that at least once a year, maybe 
more, two nuclear submarines meet beneath the polar icecap and mate 
together at an airlock. Representatives of the Soviet Union meet with the 
Policy Committee of the Bilderberg Group. The Russians are given the 
script for their next performance. Items on the agenda include the combined efforts in the secret space program governing Alternative 3. I now 
have in my possession official NASA photographs of a moonbase in the 
crater Copernicus.
This method of meeting is the only way that is safe from detection 
and/or bugging. The public outcry that would result would destroy 
everything should these meetings be discovered. A BBC-TV documentary 
program entitled "Science Report" revealed these same facts but subsequently issued a retraction. In their retraction they stated that the show 
had been fiction. It must be noted here that "Science Report" was a very 
respected documentary — nonfiction — program in Britain. Never in its 
history had it ever aired fiction. This subject is explored in depth in another 
chapter. There is no other method that I know of to verify these meetings 
short of somehow becoming a crew member on one of the submarines. Is 
Alternative 3 true, or is it a part of the plan to ring in the New World Order? 
It really doesn't matter, because either way we're screwed. The quicker 
you understand that, the wiser you become.
The members of the Bilderberg Group are the most powerful financiers, industrialists, statesmen and intellectuals, who get together each year
Chapter Two Secret Societies and the New World Order • 95
for a private conference on world affairs. The meetings provide an informal, off-the-record opportunity for international leaders to mingle, and are 
notorious for the cloak of secrecy they are held under. The headquarters 
office is in The Hague in Switzerland, the only European country never 
invaded or bombed during World Wars I and II. Switzerland is the seat of 
world power. The goal of the Bilderberg Group is a one-world totalitarian 
socialist government and economic system. Take heed, as time is running 
short.
You must understand that secrecy is wrong. The very fact that a 
meeting is secret tells me that something is going on that I would not 
approve. Do not ever believe that grown men meet on a regular basis just 
to put on fancy robes, hold candles, and glad-hand each other. George 
Bush, when he was initiated into the Skull & Bones, did not lie naked in a
coffin with a ribbon tied around his genitalia and yell out the details of all 
his sexual experiences because it was fun. He had much to gain by accepting initiation into the Order, as you can now see. These men meet for 
important reasons, and their meetings are secret because what goes on 
during the meetings would not be approved by the community. THE 
VERY FACT THAT SOMETHING IS SECRET MEANS THERE IS SOMETHING TO HIDE.
John Robison wrote Proofs of a Conspiracy in 1798, and I believe he said 
it best in the following passage from the book. "Nothing is so dangerous as 
a mystic Association. The object remaining a secret in the hands of the 
managers, the rest simply put a ring in their own noses, by which they may 
be led about at pleasure; and still panting after the secret they are the better 
pleased the less they see of their way.
"A mystical object enables the leader to shift his ground as he pleases, 
and to accommodate himself to every current fashion or prejudice. This 
Again gives him almost unlimited power; for he can make use of these 
prejudices to lead men by troops. He finds them already associated by 
their prejudices, and waiting for a leader to concentrate their strength and 
set them in motion. And when once great bodies of men are set in motion, 
with a creature of their fancy for a guide, even the engineer himself cannot 
say, 'Thus far shalt thou go, and no farther.'"
Is the common man really as stupid as the elite seem to believe? If he
is, then maybe the average citizen is better off ignorant, being manipulated
this way and that, whenever the elite deem it necessary. We will discover
the answer very quickly when the common man finds that his "E" ticket to
Fantasy Land has just expired.
I hope I have shown you the role of secret societies and groups within 
the world power structure. I hope you can see how these groups gain and
96 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
keep power. You should have some understanding of how, operating in 
secrecy and infiltrating every level of government and vital industry including the press, the elect manipulate the people and nations of the world 
toward any direction desired. I hope you caught on to the fact that the 
secret power structure is toward a totalitarian socialist state (fascism). It is 
not the Nazis, as they were a product of this power structure. It is not the 
Jews, although some very wealthy Jews are involved. It is not the Communists, as they fit the same category as the Nazis. It is not the bankers, 
but they do play an important role. I also hope that you are beginning to 
look inside yourself to see if THEIR reality fits. Are you getting the message? For a better understanding of secret societies and their role throughout the ages, I recommend you read the books listed as source material at 
the end of this chapter.
U.S. President Bush and Soviet President Gorbachev arrived yesterday on this Mediterranean island for a summit conference beginning today 
during which both hope to start the search for a New World Order.
New York Times 
December 1,1989
Chapter Two Secret Societies and the New World Order • 97
SOURCES
Alamo, Tony, various writings, Music Square Church, P.O. Box 710, Van 
Buren, Arkansas, 72956 (501) 997-8118.
Baigent, Michael, Richard Leigh, and Henry Lincoln, Holy Blood, Holy Grail, 
Delacorte Press, New York, 1982.
Baigent, Michael, Richard Leigh, and Henry Lincoln, The Messianic Legacy, 
Dell Publishing, New York, 1989.
Bramley, William, The Gods of Eden, Dahlin Family Press, San Jose, California, 
1989.
Cantwell, Alan Jr,. M.C., AIDS and the Doctors of Death, Aries Rising Press, 
1988.
Carr, William Guy, Pawns in the Game, Omni Publications, Palmdale, California, date unknown.
Daraul, Arkon, A History of Secret Societies, The Citadel Press, New York, 1961.
Epperson, Ralph, The New World Order, Publius Press, Tucson, Arizona, 1990.
Epperson, Ralph, Unseen Hand, An Introduction to the Conspiratorial View of 
History, Publius Press, Tucson, Arizona, 1985.
Hall, Manly P., The Secret Teachings of All Ages, The Philosophical Research 
Society, Inc., Los Angeles, 1988.
Hieronimus, Robert, Ph.D., America's Secret Destiny, Spiritual Vision & the 
Founding of a Nation, Destiny Books, Rochester, Vermont, 1989.
Howard, Michael, The Occult Conspiracy, Destiny Books, Rochester, Vermont, 
1989.
Mantooth, Don, The Mantooth Report (newsletter), November 1989, New 
Haven, Indiana.
Mullins, Eustace, The Curse of Canaan, Revelation Books, Staunton, Virginia, 
1987.
Robison, John, Proofs of a Conspiracy, The American Classics, Belmont, Massachusetts, 1967, originally published in 1798.
Robinson, John J., Born In Blood, The Lost Secrets of Freemasonry, M. Evans and 
Company, Inc., New York, 1989.
Sutton, Antony C, America's Secret Establishment, An Introduction to the Order 
of Skull & Bones, Liberty House Press, Billings, Montana, 1986.
98 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
Waite, Arthur Edward, A New Encyclopaedia of Freemasonry, Combined Edition, Weathervane Books, New York, 1970.
Whitmire, Richard, article on JASON, September 17, 1989, The Olympian 
(newspaper), Olympia, Washington.
CHAPTER 3
OATH 
OF INITIATION
of an 
UNIDENTIFIED 
SECRET ORDER
from
A Mother Who States That Her Son Took This Oath 
(and Who Must Remain Unidentified)
and
CONGRESSIONAL RECORD - HOUSE, 1913, p. 3216.
(furnished by Dr. Ron Brown)
Not yet, O Freedom! close thy lids in 
slumber, for thine enemy never sleeps.
Bryant
100 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
Author's Note: The author makes no claims whatsoever regarding this oath. 
It was handed to me by a woman who claimed that her son took this oath. 
Another source, Dr. Ron Brown, independent of and not known by the first, 
furnished a copy of the Congressional Record of the House of Representatives 
dated February 15,1913, where the same oath is entered as purported to be of 
the Knights of Columbus. The Congressman may have been wrong, however, 
since the content indicates that this oath may belong either to the Society of 
Jesus (otherwise known as the Jesuits) or to the Knights of Malta, which is the 
militia of the Pope. I include this oath only as an example that such oaths do 
in fact exist and are subversive. Because of the impeccably correct and difficult level of English used, the obvious expert knowledge of religious terminology and form, and the content and format of this oath, I consider it 
highly unlikely that it is a forgery. You must be the ultimate judge of its 
authenticity. The truth will win.
THE OATH
I________________________ , now in the presence of Almighty God,
the blessed Virgin Mary, the blessed St. John the Baptist, the Holy Apostles, 
St. Peter and St. Paul, and all the saints, sacred host of heaven, and to you, 
my Ghostly Father, the superior general of the Society of Jesus founded by 
St. Ignatius Loyola, in the pontification of Paul the III and continued to the 
present, do by the womb of the Virgin, the matrix of God, and the rod of 
Jesus Christ, declare and swear that His Holiness the Pope, is Christ's vice 
regent and is the true and only head of the Catholic or Universal Church 
throughout the earth; and that by virtue of the keys of binding and loosing 
given His Holiness by my Savior, Jesus Christ, he hath power to depose 
heretical kings, princes, States, Commonwealths, and Governments and 
they may be safely destroyed. Therefore to the utmost of my power I will 
defend this doctrine and His Holiness's right and custom against all usurpers of the heretical or Protestant authority whatever, especially the Lutheran Church of Germany, Holland, Denmark, Sweden, and Norway and 
the now pretended authority and Churches of England and Scotland, and 
the branches of same now established in Ireland and on the Continent of 
America and elsewhere, and all adherents in regard that they may be 
usurped and heretical, opposing the sacred Mother Church of Rome.
I do now denounce and disown any allegiance as due to any heretical 
king, prince, or State, named Protestant or Liberals, or obedience to any of 
their laws, magistrates, or officers.
I do further declare that the doctrine of the Churches of England and 
Scotland, of the Calvinists, Huguenots, and others of the name of Protes-



Chapter 3 Oath of Initiation of an Unidentified Secret Order

Chapter Three Oath of Initiation of an Unidentified Secret Order • 101
tants or Masons to be damnable, and they themselves to be damned who 
will not forsake the same.
I do further declare that I will help assist, and advise all or any of His 
Holiness's agents, in any place where I should be, in Switzerland, Germany, Holland, Ireland, or America, or in any other kingdom or territory I 
shall come to and do my utmost to extirpate the heretical Protestant or 
Masonic doctrines and to destroy all their pretended powers, legal or 
otherwise.
I do further promise and declare that, notwithstanding I am dispensed 
with to assume any religion heretical for the propagation of the Mother 
Church's interest to keep secret and private all her agents' counsels from 
time to time, as they intrust me and not divulge, directly or indirectly, by 
word, writing, or circumstances whatever but to execute all that should be 
proposed, given in charge or discovered unto me by you my Ghostly 
father, or any of this sacred order.
I do further promise and declare that I will have no opinion or will of 
my own or any mental reservation whatsoever, even as a corpse or cadaver 
(perinde ac cadaver), but will unhesitatingly obey each and every command that I may receive from my superiors in the militia of the Pope and of 
Jesus Christ.
That I will go to any part of the world whithersoever I may be sent, to 
the frozen regions north, jungles of India, to the centers of civilization of
Europe, or to the wild haunts of the barbarous savages of America without
murmuring or repining, and will be submissive in all things whatsoever is 
communicated to me.
I do further promise and declare that I will, when opportunity presents, make and wage relentless war, secretly and openly against all heretics, Protestants and Masons, as I am directed to do to extirpate them from 
the face of the whole earth; and that I will spare neither age, sex, or 
condition, and that will hang, burn, waste, boil, flay, strangle, and bury 
alive these infamous heretics; rip up the stomachs and wombs of their 
women, and crush their infants' heads against the walls in order to annihilate their execrable race. That when the same can not be done openly, I will 
secretly use the poisonous cup, the strangulation cord, the steel of the 
poniard, or the leaden bullet, regardless of the honor, rank, dignity, or 
authority of the persons, whatever may be their condition in life, either 
public or private, as I at any time may be directed so to do by any agents of 
thePope or superior of the Brotherhood of the Holy Father of the Society of
Jesus.
In confirmation of which I hereby dedicate my life, soul, and all 
corporal powers, and with the dagger which I now receive I will subscribe
102 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
my name written in my blood in testimony thereof; and should I prove 
false or weaken in my determination, may my brethren and fellow soldiers 
of the militia of the Pope cut off my hands and feet and my throat from ear 
to ear, my belly opened and sulphur burned therein with all the punishment that can be inflicted upon me on earth and my soul shall be tortured 
by demons in eternal hell forever.
That I will in voting always vote for a K. of C. in preference to a 
Protestant, especially a Mason, and that I will leave my party so to do; that 
if two Catholics are on the ticket I will satisfy myself which is the better 
supporter of Mother Church and vote accordingly.
That I will not deal with or employ a Protestant if in my power to deal 
with or employ a Catholic. That I will place Catholic girls in Protestant 
families that a weekly report may be made of the inner movements of the 
heretics.
That I will provide myself with arms and ammunition that I may be in 
readiness when the word is passed, or I am commanded to defend the 
church either as an individual or with the militia of the Pope.
All of which I,______________________, do swear by the blessed
Trinity and blessed sacrament which I am now to receive to perform and on 
part to keep this, my oath.
In testimony hereof, I take this most holy and blessed Sacrament of the 
Eucharist and witness the same further with my name written with the 
point of this dagger dipped in my own blood and seal in the face of this 
holy sacrament.
CHAPTER 4
SECRET TREATY OF 
VERONA
Precedent
and
Positive Proof of Conspiracy
from
Congressional Record - Senate, 1916, p. 6781
and
The American Diplomatic Code, Vol. 2,1778-1884, Elliott, p. 179
104 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
1916
CONGRESSIONAL RECORD SENATE
Mr. OWEN:
I wish to put in the Record the secret treaty of Verona of November 22, 
1822, showing what this ancient conflict is between the rule of the few and 
the rule of the many. I wish to call the attention of the Senate to this treaty 
because it is the threat of this treaty which was the basis of the Monroe 
doctrine. It throws a powerful white light upon the conflict between monarchical government and government by the people. The Holy Alliance 
under the influence of Metternich, the Premier of Austria, in 1822, issued 
this remarkable secret document:
AMERICAN DIPLOMATIC CODE, 1778-1884
The undersigned, specially authorized to make some additions to the 
treaty of the Holy Alliance, after having exchanged their respective credentials, have agreed as follows:
ARTICLE 1. The high contracting powers, being convinced that the 
system of representative government is equally as incompatible with the 
monarchical principles as the maxim of the sovereignty of the people with 
the divine right, engage mutually, in the most solemn manner, to use all 
their efforts to put an end to the system of representative governments, in 
whatever country it may exist in Europe, and to prevent its being introduced in those countries where it is not yet known.
ARTICLE 2. As it can not be doubted that the liberty of the press is 
the most powerful means used by the pretended supporters of the rights of 
nations to the detriment of those of princes, the high contracting parties 
promise reciprocally to adopt all proper measures to suppress it, not only 
in their own States but also in the rest of Europe.
ARTICLE 3. Convinced that the principles of religion contribute 
most powerfully to keep nations in the state of passive obedience which 
they owe to their princes, the high contracting parties declare it to be their 
intention to sustain in their respective States those measures which the 
clergy may adopt, with the aim of ameliorating their own interests, so 
intimately connected with the preservation of the authority of the princes; 
and the contracting powers join in offering their thanks to the Pope for 
what he has already done for them, and solicit his constant cooperation in 
their views of submitting the nations.
ARTICLE 4. The situation of Spain and Portugal unite unhappily all 
the circumstances to which this treaty has particular reference. The high



Chapter 4 Secret Treaty of Verona

Chapter Four Secret Treaty of Verona • 105
contracting parties, in confiding to France the care of putting an end to 
them, engaged to assist her in the manner which may the least compromit 
[sic] them with their own people and the people of France by means of a 
subsidy on the part of the two empires of 20,000,000 of francs every year 
from the date of the signature of this treaty to the end of the war.
ARTICLE 5. In order to establish in the Peninsula the order of things 
which existed before the revolution of Cadiz, and to insure the entire 
execution of the articles of the present treaty, the high contracting parties 
give to each other the reciprocal assurance that as long as their views are 
not fulfilled, rejecting all other ideas of utility or other measure to be taken, 
they will address themselves with the shortest possible delay to all the 
authorities existing in their States and to all their agents in foreign countries, with the view to establish connections tending toward the accomplishment of the objects proposed by this treaty.
ARTICLE 6. This treaty shall be renewed with such changes as new 
circumstances may give occasion for, either at a new congress or at the 
court of one of the contracting parties, as soon as the war with Spain shall 
be terminated.
ARTICLE 7. The present treaty shall be ratified and the ratifications 
exchanged at Paris within the space of six months.
Made at Verona
the 22nd November, 1822.
for Austria: METTERNICH 
for France: CHATEAUBRIAND 
for Prussia: BERNSTET 
for Russia: NESSELRODE
Mr. OWEN:
I ask to have printed in the CONGRESSIONAL RECORD this secret
treaty, because I think it ought to be called now to the attention of the
people of the United States and of the World. This evidence of the conflict
between the rule of the few versus popular government should be emphasized on the minds of the people of the United States, that the conflict
now waging throughout the world may be more clearly understood, for
after all said the great pending war springs from the weakness and frailty
of government by the few, where human error is far more probable than the
error of the many where aggressive war is only permitted upon the authorizing vote of those whose lives are jeopardized in the trenches of modern
war.
106 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
Mr. SHAFROTH:
Mr. President, I should like to have the Senator state whether in that 
treaty there was not a coalition formed between the powerful countries of 
Europe to reestablish the sovereignty of Spain in the Republics of South 
and Central America?
Mr. OWEN:
I was just going to comment upon that, and I am going to take but a 
few moments to do so because I realize the pressure of other matters. This 
Holy Alliance, having put a Bourbon prince upon the throne of France by 
force, then used France to suppress the constitution of Spain immediately 
afterwards and by this very treaty gave her a subsidy of 20,000,000 francs 
annually to enable her to wage war upon the people of Spain and prevent 
their exercise of any measure of the right of self-government. The Holy 
Alliance immediately did the same thing in Italy, by sending Austrian 
troops to Italy, where the people there attempted to exercise a like measure 
of liberal constitutional self-government; and it was not until the printing 
press, which the Holy Alliance so stoutly opposed, taught the people of 
Europe the value of liberty that finally one country after another seized a 
greater and greater right of self-government until now it may be fairly said 
that nearly all the nations of Europe have a very large measure of selfgovernment.
However, I wished to call the attention of the Senate and the country 
to this important history in the growth of constitutional popular selfgovernment. The Holy Alliance made its powers felt by the wholesale 
drastic suppression of the press in Europe, by universal censorship, by 
killing free speech and all ideas of popular rights, and by the complete 
suppression of popular government. The Holy Alliance having destroyed 
popular government in Spain and in Italy, had well-laid plans also to 
destroy popular government in the American colonies which had revolted 
from Spain and Portugal in Central and South America under the influence 
of the successful example of the United States. It was because of this 
conspiracy against the American Republics by the European monarchies 
that the great English statesman, Canning, called the attention of our 
Government to it, and our statesmen then, including Thomas Jefferson, 
took an active part to bring about the declaration by President Monroe in 
his next annual message to the Congress of the United States that the 
United States would regard it as an act of hostility to the Government of the 
United States and an unfriendly act if this coalition or if any power of 
Europe ever undertook to establish upon the American Continent any 
control of any American Republic or to acquire any territorial rights.
Chapter Four Secret Treaty of Verona • 107
 This is the so-called Monroe doctrine. The threat under the secret 
treaty of Verona to suppress popular government in the American Republics is the basis of the Monroe doctrine. This secret treaty sets forth clearly 
the conflict between monarchical government and popular government 
and the government of the few as against the government of the many. It 
is a part in reality, of developing popular sovereignty when we demand for 
women equal rights to life, to liberty, to the possession of property, to an 
equal voice in the making of the laws and the administration of the laws, 
This demand on the part of the women is made by men, and it ought to be 
made by men as well as by thinking, progressive women, as it will promote 
human liberty and human happiness. I sympathize with it, and I hope that 
all parties will in the national conventions give their approval to this larger 
measure of liberty to the better half of the human race. 
Author's Note: Anyone who believes that the monarchs, after being deposed, 
forgave and forgot, is not playing with a full deck. 
Most of these families are wealthy beyond belief and may be more powerful 
today than when they sat upon thrones. Today they are known collectively as 
the Black Nobility. Just because the secret treaty of Verona was signed in 1822 
does not mean that the treaty is void. It is imperative that you realize that 
privately, the Black Nobility refuses to ever recognize any government other 
than heir own inherited and divine right to rule. They work diligently behind
 the scenes to cause conditions whereby they might regain their crowns. 
They believe that the United States belongs to England.



Chapter 5 Good-by USA, Hello New World Order

CHAPTER 5
GOOD-BYE USA
HELLO 
NEW WORLD ORDER
Backbone of Hidden Government
Subversion of the Balance of Power
The plan to suspend the Constitution 
and declare martial law
It could probably be shown by facts and figures
that there is no distinctly native
American criminal class except Congress,
Mark Twain, 1885
110 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
THE BALANCE OF POWER
When our forefathers wrote the Constitution of these United States 
they provided safeguards against despotism by providing a balance of 
power. The Constitution was set up to provide clear divisions of Legislative, Judicial, and Executive powers. It was believed that this system 
would ensure that if one branch got out of hand the other two would act to 
keep the one in check. This balance of power was predicated upon the 
assumption that none of the three branches could or would infringe upon 
the power of the others.
The Constitution is clear on the functions of each of the branches. The 
Legislative will make the laws. The Judicial will interpret the law. The 
Executive will decide policy and enforce the law. This, of course, is the 
simplest of explanations, but this is not a textbook on government. My 
intent is to acquaint you with simple basics of the balance of power so that 
you can then understand how it has been subverted.
The Legislature (Congress in the form of the House and Senate) is 
required to publish the laws that are made, and this is done in the Congres 
sional Record and the Federal Register. Pending or passed legislation can 
be obtained by citizens through their Congressmen or from the Government Printing Office. Citizens cannot be held responsible for the law if it is 
not made available to them.
It is paradoxical that the government body most representative of the 
American citizen is the one that has been the most easily subverted. 
Through PACs, payoffs, pork-barrel politics, professional politicians, Congressmen who are members of secret societies and through greed and fear, 
our Representatives and Senators quit representing us long ago.
Congress has tremendous powers but fails in most cases to exercise 
even a token amount. How is it that our Legislature has allowed and at 
times encouraged the Executive branch to write law? You probably did not 
know that the President and others in the Executive branch of the government can and do write law. This is done in the form of Presidential 
Executive orders, National Security Council memos, National Security 
Decision directives, and National Security directives.
NSC memos were broad policy papers in the days after passage of the 
National Security Act. NSC memos became narrower and more specific 
over the years, and the name has varied. Under Kennedy they were called 
National Security Action Memorandums. President Bush has changed the 
name to National Security Directives.
There is a tremendous difference between Presidential Executive orders, NSC memos, and National Security Decision directives. Presidential
Chapter Five Good-bye USA, Hello New World Order • 111
Executive orders are listed in the Federal Register or Presidential Findings, 
which are made known to the House and Senate Intelligence Committees. 
The most important difference between the Presidential Executive orders 
and all of the others, no matter what they are called, is that the others do 
not have to be reported, reviewed, made available to anyone, or even 
acknowledged that they exist.
There is no oversight whatsoever that could maintain a check on the 
legality of these National Security directives. The President and others 
within the Executive branch have used these supersecret directives to skirt 
the balance of power and write law without anyone's knowledge. Justification of the President's power to write law through Executive orders 
stems from the failure of the Government to rescind the declaration of 
martial law during the Civil War. In effect, the United States has been 
under martial law ever since Lincoln's administration. 
These NSDs are powerful, hidden, and dangerous tools. They were 
prolific during the Reagan administration: over 300 were written, with no 
more than 50 ever leaking out to undergo public scrutiny. Yet most Americans have never heard of these subversive weapons. They are being used 
to destroy our Constitution. I believe that everyone should know about 
this corruption of government.
Congress has turned a blind eye to these abuses of executive power. 
At 3:30 a.m. Saturday, August 4,1990, the Senate made it even easier for the 
Executive branch to subvert the Constitution and may have made George 
Bush the first American king. At that time on that day, a minority of United 
States senators, maybe ten at the most, passed Senate Intelligence Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1991 (S.B. 2834). This bill will fundamentally 
change our constitutional system and threatens to destroy the very foundations of our great nation. Since attention has been focused upon the Middle 
East crisis, the public and most Congressmen know absolutely nothing 
about this bill.
The bill was fraudulently introduced as a reform to prevent future
incidents of the abuses brought to light during the Iran-Contra scandal.
Instead of preventing future abuses, however, it virtually authorizes essentially every abuse. The bill was carefully brought to a vote by Senator Sam
Nunn in the dead of night when the opposition was gone. It effectively
transfers most authority over the United States government directly into
the hands of George Bush and thus directly into the hands of the Secret
Government.
The President (presently George Bush) was given the power to initiate
 war, appropriate public funds, define foreign policy goals, and decide what 
is important to our national security. In "Oversight of Intelligence Ac-
112 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
tivities," Tide VII, S.B. 2834 authorizes the following:
Gives the president power to initiate covert actions (this has never 
before been given to the President); prevents Congress from stopping the 
President's initiation of covert actions; allows the President to use any 
federal ''departments, agencies, or entities'' to operate or finance a covert 
operation; empowers the President to use any other nation or private 
contractor or person to fund or operate a covert action; redefines covert 
actions as operations "necessary to support foreign policy objectives of the 
United States," a definition that is so vague and broad as to be essentially 
unlimited; for the first time officially claims the right of the United States to 
secretly interfere in the internal "political, economic, or military affairs" of 
other countries in direct and flagrant violation of international law; requires that the President prepare and deliver a written finding to the 
Intelligence committees of the Congress but allows the President to omit 
"extremely sensitive matters" and authorizes the President to claim executive privilege if Congress asks too many questions.
There are no penalties in the bill for violating any of its provisions, 
including the provision requiring a finding. Why should there be? This 
bill has literally handed the power of all the branches of government to the 
President on a silver platter. President Bush is now truly American King 
George the First. S.B. 2834 gives Bush the power to use any agency or 
branch of the government and any appropriated funds from any agency or 
branch of the government for covert action even if they were never appropriated for that purpose. The bill effectively prevents any oversight by 
anyone and allows the Executive branch to skirt the law and to escape 
accountability. This will be done using National Security directives. A few 
examples of past NSD directives that have come to light will help you 
understand the seriousness of the matter. They will be listed in the following paragraphs under the heading of the subject matter of the NSDDs:
NSDD 84: SAFEGUARDING NATIONAL SECURITY INFORMATION [SECRECY], 3/11/83 (Declassified in full). SUBJECT: This directive 
drastically expands restrictions on government employees' freedom of 
speech. Those with access to classified information were required to sign a 
nondisclosure agreement; those with access to a special category of classified information were made to agree to prepublication review of any 
future writings. The use of polygraphs was authorized. PURPOSE: Prevent disclosure of information that could damage national security. CONSEQUENCES: The polygraph requirement was rescinded due to 
Congressional opposition. Secrecy restrictions were imposed on more than 
4 million government employees and CONTRACTORS for more than fifty 
executive agencies. Many reporters' contacts were shut down. Govern-
Chapter Five Good-bye USA, Hello New World Order • 113
ment employees' unions and members of Congress sued to protect the 
rights of whistleblowers, and the Supreme Court recently sent the case 
back to the district level for review.
Author's Note: NSDD 84 indicates that John Lear, Robert Lazar, Bruce 
Macabbee, Stanton Friedman, Clifford Stone, and many others may be active 
government agents. They were all working in government jobs or for government contractors and all of them were subject to this executive order. NSDD 
84 was not used to silence them, which seems to indicate that they had 
executive approval in each and every instance.
NSDD 17: DETERRING CUBAN MODELS/COVERT ACTION IN 
NICARAGUA, 11/23/81 (Classified). SUBJECT: The Central Intelligence 
Agency was given authority to create the contras and "work with foreign 
governments as appropriate" to undermine the Sandinista government of 
Nicaragua. PURPOSE: To stop the flow of arms from Cuban and Nicaraguan sources to the Salvadoran rebels. CONSEQUENCES: The C.I.A. was 
given $19 million to assemble and arm a force of 500 contras to join with 
1000 exiles already being trained by Argentina. Scores of operatives arrived in Honduras; arms shipments from Miami began. The contra war 
was set in motion.
NSDD 77: MANAGEMENT OF PUBLIC DIPLOMACY RELATIVE
TO NATIONAL SECURITY, 1/14/83 (Declassified in full). SUBJECT: This
directive set up several planning groups to conduct "public diplomacy
activities." It ordered "organizational support for foreign governments
and private groups to encourage the growth of democratic political institutions and practices." PURPOSE: To mobilize international and domestic
support for "our national security objectives." CONSEQUENCES:
Created propaganda ministries in the National Security Council, the State
Department and the White House that concentrated on, in the words of the
NSC staff member in charge of the program, "gluing black hats on the
Sandinistas and white hats on UNO" (the contras' United Nicaraguan
Opposition). Stories were planted in the press; journalists were pressured.
The General Accounting Office later found that these activities violated the
law banning "covert propaganda" inside the United States. How many
other covert propaganda programs do you think are operating against the
American Citizens? I can assure you that there are many more than you
would ever believe.
NSDD 138: INTERNATIONAL TERRORISM, 4/3/84 (Classified).
SUBJECT: This directive endorsed the principle of preemptive strikes and
retaliatory raids against terrorists and called on 26 Federal agencies to
recommend specific measures to combat terrorism. PURPOSE: To lessen
114 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
international terrorism and free U.S. hostages in Lebanon. While this NSD 
directive pretends to be concerned about international terrorism, it is really 
a thinly disguised authorization of preemptive strikes and retaliatory raids 
against patriots in this country. When FEMA is activated, patriots will be 
rounded up in the dead of night, most likely on a national holiday such as 
Thanksgiving. Government agents and law-enforcement officers in every 
city across the nation have received antiterrorist training under this NSDD 
directive, and I can assure you the target is patriots. CONSEQUENCES: 
Set up the Terrorist Incident Working Group under North in the NSC. Its 
first major action was the interception and capture of the Achille Lauro 
hijackers, which gave North's career an important boost.
Either NSDD 138 or a subsequent NSD directive on terrorism 
authorized the training of three Lebanese units for preemptive strikes. 
When problems arose, Director of Central Intelligence William Casey took 
that operation off the books and enlisted Saudi Arabian help in an attempt 
to assassinate the head of Hezbollah. A resulting car bombing killed about 
eighty in Beirut; Sheik Fadlallah, the target was unhurt. The U.S. military, 
along with civilian law-enforcement teams, conducted joint antiterrorist 
training across America. To allay public fears the participants wore civilian 
clothing.
NSD directives have become the de facto legislative vehicle of the 
national security state. It has become known through the research of Susan 
Fitzgerald, a research consultant at the Fund for Constitutional Government in Washington who has collected declassified NSD directives, that 
many were released without the White House letterhead at the top of the 
page and without the President's signature at the bottom. This, she speculates, is to conceal the fact that the signatures on some of them would reveal 
that they had been made by autopen, not by Ronald Reagan's own hand. 
That should give you a taste of what we are up against. Please understand 
that virtually all but a very few NSD directives still remain classified, and 
unless the public forces disclosure their effect will probably never be 
known.
Somewhere within the volumes of secret NSD directives there is a plan 
to suspend the Constitution of the United States of America. The existence 
of this plan surfaced during the Iran-Contra hearings. Congressman Jack 
Brooks (D), Texas, attempted to bring it into the open. When he asked Col. 
North directly if North had ever helped draft a plan to suspend the Constitution, Brooks was silenced by the committee chairman Senator Daniel 
K. Inouye (D), Hawaii. Senator Inouye stated that the subject dealt with 
national security, and any questions regarding the matter could be brought 
up during a closed-door session. We never learned the outcome. I would
Chapter Five Good-bye USA, Hello New World Order • 115
like to know who gave anyone, in any branch of government, with any 
title, the right to suspend the Constitution at any time, for any reason, 
under any conditions?
I believe the plan to suspend the Constitution is directly tied to the 
underground facility called Mount Weather and to the Federal Emergency 
Management Agency (FEMA). Mount Weather is so shrouded in secrecy 
that 99.9% of Americans have never heard of it. FEMA, however, is 
another story. Remember Hurricane Hugo? Remember the federal agency 
(FEMA) that was sent to handle the emergency and was thrown out by the 
citizens because of gross incompetence? FEMA was incompetent, because
"emergency management" is just a guise for its real purpose, which is to 
take over local, state, and federal government in case of a national emergency. The only way FEMA could do such a thing is if the Constitution 
Were suspended and martial law were to be declared. Therefore its very 
existence is proof positive that a plan to suspend the Constitution does in fact exist.
MOUNT WEATHER
Just outside of a sleepy little town called Bluemont, Virginia, about 46 
miles west of Washington D.C., is an area of wilderness covering what has 
been called the toughest granite rock in the eastern United States. The area 
is surrounded by signs marked "Restricted Area" and "This installation 
has been declared a restricted area....Unauthorized entry is prohibited." 
Other signs state: "All persons and vehicles entering hereon are liable to 
search. Photographing, making notes, drawings, maps or graphic representations of this area or its activities is prohibited. Such material found in 
the possession of unauthorized persons will be confiscated. Internal Security Act of 1950." The installation is beneath a mountain and its name is the 
Western Virginia Office of Controlled Conflict Operations. Its nickname is
Mount Weather. It was ordered to be built by the Federal Civil Defense
Administration, which is now the Federal Preparedness Agency.
Mount Weather was designed in the early '50s as part of a civil defense 
program to house and protect the Executive branch of the Federal government. The official name was "The Continuity of Government Program."
Congress has repeatedly tried to discover the real purpose of Mount 
Weather, but so far has been unable to find out ANYTHING about the 
secret installation. Retired Air Force General Leslie W. Bray, director of the 
Federal Preparedness Agency, told the Senate Subcommittee on Constitutional Rights in September 1975: "I am not at liberty to describe precisely 
what is the role and the mission and the capability that we have at Mount
Weather or at any other precise location."
In June 1975, Senator John Tunney (D), California, chairman of the
116 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
Subcommittee on Constitutional Rights, charged that Mount Weather held 
dossiers on at least 100,000 Americans. He later alleged that the Mount 
Weather computers, described as "the best in the world," can obtain millions of pieces of additional information on the personal lives of American 
citizens simply by tapping the data stored at any of the other 96 Federal 
Relocation Centers.
I know from my stint with the Office of Naval Intelligence that these 
dossiers consist of information collected about American patriots, men and 
women who are most likely to resist the destruction of our Constitution 
and the formation of the totalitarian police state under the New World 
Order. The patriot data bank is constantly updated so that when the 
appointed hour arrives all patriots can be rounded up with little if any 
effort. The plan calls for this to be accomplished in the dead of night on a 
national holiday. The most likely holiday is Thanksgiving, when everyone, 
no matter the religion, race, or creed, will be at home. The targets will be 
ripe for the picking after a heavy meal, maybe some alcoholic beverages, 
and during a deep sleep. There is a traitor in the patriot movement who 
provides the Secret Government with accurate names and addresses of 
patriots who will fight to protect and defend the Constitution.
MY RECOMMENDATION IS THAT NO PATRIOT SHOULD EVER 
BE AT HOME OR AT THE HOME OF ANY FAMILY MEMBER ON ANY 
HOUDAY EVER AGAIN UNTIL THE TRAITORS HAVE BEEN HUNG 
AND THE CONSTITUTION RESTORED AS THE SUPREME LAW OF 
THE LAND.
Some sources state that Mount Weather is virtually an underground 
city complete with dormitories, private apartments, streets, sidewalks, 
cafeterias, hospitals, water-purification systems, power plant, office buildings, a lake fed by fresh water from underground springs, a mass-transit 
system, and many other astounding things.
Several disturbing facts emerge when one researches Mount Weather. 
One is the conclusion that a complete parallel government exists at the site. 
Nine Federal departments exist there — Agriculture, Commerce, HEW, 
HUD, Interior, Labor, State, Transportation, and the Treasury. Apparently 
at least five Federal agencies are also in residence: FCC, Selective Service, 
Federal Power Commission, Civil Service Commission, and the Veterans 
Administration. Two privately owned corporations have offices at Mount 
Weather: the Federal Reserve and the U.S. Post Office. There is also an 
Office of the Presidency. What makes all this upsetting is that there is a 
President and a complete set of cabinet officers in residence at Mount 
Weather. Who are they and who appointed them? Where is such a thing 
provided for in the Constitution of the United States of America?
Chapter Five Good-bye USA, Hello New World Order • 117
Mount Weather is the operational center — the hub — of over 96 other 
underground Federal Relocation Centers scattered across the United 
States. The majority of these appear to be concentrated in Pennsylvania, 
Virginia, West Virginia, Maryland, and North Carolina. Each of these 
facilities contains computer data banks holding information — not on 
enemy agents, Soviet diplomats, or suspected terrorists but on American 
citizens, patriots. A list of other files kept at the facilities was furnished to 
the Subcommittee on Constitutional Rights in 1975. The list included 
"military installations, government facilities, communications, transportation, energy and power, agriculture, manufacturing, wholesale and retail 
services, manpower, financial, medical and educational institutions, sanitary facilities, population, housing shelter, and stockpiles."
The committee concluded that these data bases "operate with few, if 
any, safeguards or guidelines." Senator James Abourzek (D), South 
Dakota, a member of the subcommittee, said, "I feel the entire operation 
has eluded the supervision of either Congress or the courts." Chairman 
Tunney said, "Mount Weather is out of control." Nothing was done by 
Congress to rectify the situation, however, and Mount Weather remains out 
of control.
Former high-level officials from Mount Weather agree that the base at
Mount Weather is much more than any standby government facility or
storage center for the preservation of records; they describe it as an ACTUAL GOVERNMENT-IN-WAITING. "We do not merely store essential
information; the facility attempts to duplicate the vital functions of the
Executive branch of the Administration." As stated above, according to my
research, this includes a President and all Cabinet members actually in
residence. Protocol even demands that subordinates address them as "Mr.
President" or "Mr. Secretary." Most of these mysterious appointees have
held their positions through several administrations. "We just act on the
orders of the President in national emergencies," said one former Mount
Weather official.
The FPA in its 1974 Annual Report stated that "Studies conducted at
Mount Weather involve the control and management of domestic political
unrest where there are material shortages (such as food riots) or in strike
situations where the FPA determines that there are industrial disruptions
and other domestic resource crises." The report states that the bureaucracy
at Mount Weather invokes what it calls "Civil Crisis Management."
Officials who were at Mount Weather and who have furnished us with
data say that during the 1960s the complex was actually prepared to
assume certain governmental powers at the time of the 1961 Cuban missile
crisis and the assassination of President Kennedy In 1963. The source said
118 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
that the installation used the tools of its "Civil Crisis Management" program on a standby basis during the 1967 and 1968 urban riots and during a 
number of national antiwar demonstrations against the administration by 
the American people.
Daniel J. Cronin, who was the assistant director for the FPA, outlined 
a massive surveillance and manipulation program that is directed against 
the American population on a continuing basis. The FPA has organized an 
impressive armament of resources and equipment. Mr. Cronin described 
in an interview his agency's attitude toward its wide-ranging surveillance 
program. "We try to monitor situations," he said, "and get to them before 
they become emergencies....No expense is spared in the monitoring program." He cited reconnaissance satellites, local and state police intelligence reports, and law-enforcement agencies of the Federal government as 
examples of the resources available to the FPA for information-gathering.
The only document that I was able to find that attempts to outline 
some of the statutory authority of Mount Weather is Executive Order 
11490. It was drafted by Gen. George A. Lincoln, former director for the 
Office of Emergency Preparedness (preceded FPA) and was signed into law 
by President Nixon in October 1969. Executive Order 11490 superseded 
Executive Order 11051, signed on October 2,1962, by President Kennedy. 
Kennedy's order used the language, "Whereas, national preparedness 
must be achieved—as may be required to deal with increases in international tension with limited war, or with general war including attack upon the 
United States..." Nixon's order began: "Whereas our national security is 
dependent upon our ability to assure continuity of government, at every 
level, in any national emergency type situation that might conceivably 
confront the nation..." Nixon has deleted any reference to "war," "imminent attack," and "general war" from the order and replaced them with 
the phrase "during any emergency that might CONCEIVABLY occur."
Nixon's order, which is the one in effect today, allows the government 
in the form of FEMA to suspend the Constitution for literally any reason 
they decide to call a national emergency. I CANNOT FIND A PLAN OR 
EXECUTIVE ORDER ANYWHERE WHICH OUTLINES ANY PROCEDURE OR ALLOWANCE FOR THE RESTORATION OF THE CONSTITUTION AFTER A NATIONAL EMERGENCY HAS ENDED. THIS LEADS 
TO THE OBVIOUS CONCLUSION THAT NO RESTORATION OF THE 
CONSTITUTION IS CONTEMPLATED OR DESIRED BY THOSE IN 
POWER.
In 1975, Senator Tunney expressed concern, "We know, from what 
we've heard in the press, that 15,000 names were being maintained by the 
FBI for detention in an emergency...We also know that the IRS had its files
Chapter Five Good-bye USA, Hello New World Order • 119
on individual taxpayers. We know that the CIA had their Operation 
CHAOS and that the NSA has the records of conversations that have been 
intercepted electronically. My question is this: Is there anyone like yourself, General Bray, that is in control of the overall access to this data if it is 
maintained in a relocation site? And your answer, as I understood it, is 
no.'' Tunney continued: "General Bray, I must say that I still don't know 
who's in control of these relocation centers....You say you don't have that 
knowledge and still we don't know from the...three witnesses that we had 
here today, that they had information as to who has control of those 
centers."
"I am not at liberty," Bray answered, "to describe precisely what is the 
role and the mission and the capability that we have at Mount Weather, or 
at any other precise location." I firmly believe that our Continuity of 
Government program has not provided continuity at all, but has been the 
instrument for discontinuing open and democratic government, and that 
the very program designed to protect Americans has actually been turned 
against us.
We at the executive level here were active in either OSS, the State 
Department, or the European Economic Administration. During those 
times, and without exception, we operated under directions issued by the 
White House. We are continuing to be guided by just such directives, the 
substance of which were to the effect that we should make every effort to 
so alter a life in the United States as to make possible a comfortable 
merger with the Soviet Union.
H. Rowan Gaither
President of the Ford Foundation
1953
120 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
SOURCES
"Bureaucrats Get Ready for a Presidential Order," Spotlight, Washington 
D.C, July 27,1987.
Pell, Eve, "The Backbone of Hidden Government," The Nation, June 19,1989.
Pollock, Richard P., "The Mysterious Mountain," The Progressive, March 12, 
1976.
Sinkin, Lanny, "Democracy at Risk If Covert Bill Passes," ANOTHER VIEW, 
Los Angeles Daily News, September 19,1990.
Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents, Office of the Federal 
Register, National Archives and Records Administration, Washington 
D.C, 1950 to present.
Witt, Howard, "Lawyers Press U.S. on Martial Law Plan," Chicago Tribune, 
August 15,1983.



Chapter 6 H.R. 4079 and FEMA Federal Emergency Management Agency

CHAPTER 6
H.R. 4079 & FEMA
FEDERAL
EMERGENCY 
MANAGEMENT 
AGENCY
Tool That Can Be Used to Establish the Police 
State 
 PATRIOTS and TAX PROTESTERS:
YOU MUST NEVER BE FOUND AT HOME ON 
ANY HOLIDAY.
Your life depends upon how well you can obey that rule.
122 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
FEMA
(Federal Emergency Management Agency)
The following is a transcript of an audiotape with an urgent message 
to the people from William Cooper on the subject of H.R. 4079. We must 
stop the traitors now. William Cooper dictated this information to me by 
phone early in 1990 and I tape-recorded the information as he gave it. I 
made many tapes and sent them out exactly as Mr. Cooper has asked me to 
do and those recipients have done the same. My name is Richard Murray 
and I believe that William Cooper is the only man in America outside the 
Secret Government who truly knows what is happening and what it means 
to us, the average American Citizens.
[Begin tape] There's a guy by the name of Buster Horton. He's a 
member of FEMA, and he's a member of the interdepartmental unit which 
is empowered in the event of a national security emergency to become the 
unelected national government, a sort of FEMA secret government, so to 
speak.
A pretext for invoking those emergency measures can be found almost 
daily in the newspapers. It can be anything from the suspension of debt 
payments by the high bureaus of American countries, to mass runs on U.S. 
commercial banks — and thaf s an issue, by the way, thafs being handled 
personally by the National Security Council and Brent Scocroft — to food 
shortages, to the drug war. The whole bit — anything, any disaster emergency declared at all, even including the oil spill from the Exxon tanker in 
Alaska. If the President had declared a national emergency, that could 
have triggered it. Any instability in the Middle East — anything, in fact.
And they've already tested their capabilities in April 1984 with REX84A. And that was designed to test the readiness of the U.S. civilian and 
military agencies to respond to a serious national security crisis.
Now, the Executive order that will implement this, the Executive 
Order 11051, details responsibilities to the Office of Emergency Planning or 
FEMA. It gives authorization to put ALL Executive orders into effect in 
times of national emergency declared by the President, increased international tension or economical or financial crisis. (Note that it covers every 
conceivable domestic crisis but does not even mention war or nuclear 
attack.)
Now, the only thing that has to happen for FEMA to be able to 
implement all the executive orders, emergency executive orders, is for the 
President to declare a national emergency of any type, as long as it's a 
national emergency.
Chapter Six H.R. 4079 & FEMA • 123
Executive Order 10995 provides for the takeover of the communications media.
Executive Order 10997 provides for the takeover of all electric, power, 
petroleum, gas, fuels, and minerals.
Executive Order 10988 provides for the takeover of food resources and
farms.
Executive Order 10999 provides for the takeover of all modes of transportation, control of highways, seaports, etc.
Executive Order 11000 provides for mobilization of all civilians into 
work brigades under the Government supervision.
Executive Order 11001 provides for Governmental takeover of all 
health, education and welfare functions.
Executive Order 11002 designates the Postmaster General to operate a 
national registration of all persons.
Executive Order 11003 provides for the Government to take over 
airports and aircraft.
Executive Order 11004 provides for the Housing and Finance Authority to relocate communities, designate areas to be abandoned, and establish 
new locations for populations.
Executive Order 11005 provides for the Government to take over 
railroads, inland waterways and public storage facilities.
Now, all of these were COMBINED under Nixon into one huge Executive order, which allows all of this to take place if the President declares a
national emergency and it can be implemented by the head of FEMA, NOT
BY THE PRESIDENT. The President has already given him that power
under these executive orders.
All of these were combined into Executive Order 11490 and that was 
signed by President Carter on July 20,1979, and is, in fact, law.
So, if H.R. 4079 is passed and the President does what it says and
declares a national emergency because of the drug situation, whether it's
for one year, five years, five minutes or forever, it doesn't make any difference. FEMA then can implement all these Executive orders, take over all
local, state, and national government suspend the Constitution and do
whatever they want to do.
Now, remember what North said during the Iran-Contra hearings. He
said that they were prepared to suspend the Constitution of the United
States. And he said if it hadn't been for their getting caught that this would
have happened. And all that did was delay it. This is what is still going to
happen.
Now, they've nominated (and I think he's been appointed) Maj. Gen. 
Calvin Franklin, who's the head of FEMA. He was nominated because of
124 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
discussions proposing the removal of the implementation of the National 
Guard in Washington, D.C. And Maj. Gen. Franklin is or was the Commanding General of the District of Columbia National Guard.
Now, you've got to know that the National Guard would be of no help 
at all in combating drug traffic in Washington, D.C, or anywhere else. The 
primary effectiveness of the National Guard is in controlling mass civil 
disorders.
On March 24, President Bush issued a new Executive order delegating 
to the Director of FEMA powers which were vested in the President by the 
Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act of 1988. And although the 
order is described by the White House as simply a technical matter, in 
reality the revision delegates to the FEMA Director, direct responsibility for 
a large number of items which were earlier only the President's prerogative. And that includes responsibility for General Federal Assistance, Federal Emergency Assistance, Hazard Mitigation, Individual and Family 
Grant Programs, and the power to direct other federal agencies to assist in 
an emergency. AND THAT'S THE KEY. All other federal agencies will 
come under FEMA.
Of course, the President retains the power to actually declare an emergency, but as soon as he does that, the implementation of the measures 
utilized will be transferred directly to the Director of FEMA. The brains 
behind this contingency plan for a police state were the members of the 
Council on Foreign Relations and the Trilateral Commission, both of which 
Bush is a member. And Brent Scocroft, National Security Adviser, who was 
a member of FEMA's Advisory Board until he was appointed by Bush to 
head the National Security Council, is a member of the Trilateral Commission and also a business partner of Henry Kissinger, who has been a traitor 
to this country for many, many years. And of course Scocroft would 
become the superior to FEMA in the chain of command of the National 
Security Emergency whenever it is declared.
The FEMA Advisory Board is dominated by Prof. Samuel P. Huntington. In 1978 Huntington drafted for Jimmy Carter Presidential Memorandum 32, which led to the creation of FEMA in 1979. And he's a Harvard 
Professor.
He wrote the "Seminal Peace" for the Trilateral Commission in the 
mid-1970s, recommending that democracy and economic development be 
discarded as outdated ideas. He wrote, as co-author of the book Crises in 
Democracy, "We have come to recognize that there are potential desirable 
limits to economic growth. There are also potentially desirable limits to the 
indefinite extension of political democracy. A Government which lacks 
authority will have little ability short of cataclysmic crisis to impose on its
Chapter Six H.R. 4079 & FEMA • 125
people the sacrifices which may be necessary."
All of Huntington's ideas were rewritten into National Security Decision Directive 47, which is in NSDD 47, and that was enacted by President 
Reagan on July 22, 1982. It identified important areas to be upgraded, such 
as the nation's industrial base to maintain the national defense, but it 
nonetheless — and this is very important — laid the groundwork for the 
secret government's options to institute a police state, and its title is Emergency Mobilization Preparedness. It ordered preparedness measures that 
involved the waiving or modification of socioeconomic regulations that 
delay emergency responses and that should receive priority attention. It
also specified that preparedness measures that are or may be impeded by 
legal constraints be identified in the priority task that lays the groundwork
for the SUSPENSION OF THE CONSTITUTION.
Make copies of this tape if you want to. You don't even have to
transcribe it if you don't want to. BUT GET THIS OUT TO THE PEOPLE.
It's important that they understand that if H.R. 4079 is passed — they're
history.
They won't pass it if we get this out to the people and tell them that 
this is what they're doing. Most people don't even know about it, and 
that's to the Secret Government's benefit. If we get this out and tell people
what they're doing, then people can get on the phone and then go down 
and kick their Congressman's ass (which is what they should have been 
doing years ago) and get this thing thrown out of Congress. And the next 
thing they need to do is throw their Congressmen and their Senators out of 
Congress — and keep them out of Congress. And put their neighbors in 
there, people they can trust, and keep them in there for only one term. THE 
CONSTITUTION IS IN SERIOUS DANGER.
This has nothing to do with the right wing, left wing, or any other 
damn thing. It has to do with the Illuminati taking over this country and 
joining in the New World Order.
When you give this out to people, make sure they agree to make ten 
copies and send them to all their friends. [End of tape]
I decided that the transcript of this tape says it all. Why write it again?
H.R. 4079
As of this writing H.R. 4079 is still in committee and has not been 
subjected to a vote. It is one of the most deceptive and dangerous pieces of 
legislation to go in front of the Congress in many years. It must be stopped 
at all costs. You must call your representative and stop this bill.
H.R. 4079 has included within its pages two provisions that are meant
126 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
to divert attention from the fact that the bill would declare a state of 
national emergency for five years and would allow FEMA to literally take 
over local, state, and federal government. This means that the Constitution 
of the United States could be suspended.
The diversions used are terrible if allowed to sneak through. One is a 
clause that would eliminate the 4th amendment to the Constitution and the 
other would eliminate the 8th amendment to the Constitution. The diversion would cause heated argument over these two provisions, resulting in 
some sort of compromise while allowing the declaration of a 5-year state of 
national emergency to sail right through Congress and become signed into 
law. If that happens if s good-bye USA, hello New World Order.
Call your Congressman and insist that he/she deliver into your hands 
a complete copy of H.R. 4079 immediately. Do not take no for an answer. 
Read it and defeat it.
[Added before press time: H.R. 4079 may have been secretly passed just as 
S.B. 2834 was passed and H.R. 4079 may be Public Law 101-647 signed into law 
by President Bush on November 29, 1990. If this has occurred, then we are 
already subject to a FEMA takeover. I am attempting to acquire a copy of P.L. 
101-647. This late-breaking new was furnished by a Congressional staff member 
and has not been verified as of January 8,1991.]
Chapter Six H.R. 4079 & FEMA • 127
SOURCES
"Bureaucrats Get Ready for a Presidential Order," Spotlight, Washington D.C., 
July 27,1987.
Codification of Presidential Proclamations and Executive Orders, Office of the 
Federal Register, National Archives and Records Administration, 
Washington D.C., 1/20/61-1/20/85.
Murray, Richard, transcript of phone conversation with William Cooper, 
FEMA & H.R. 4079, San Diego, California, Winter 1989.
Pell, Eve, 'The Backbone of Hidden Government,' The Nation, June 19,1989.
Pollock, Richard P., 'The Mysterious Mountain," The Progressive, March 12, 
1976.
Quinde, Herbert, article from Executive Intelligence Report News Service, 
Washington D.C., April (no year on document), uploaded to my computer BBS by anonymous user.
Sinkin, Lanny, "Democracy at Risk If Covert Bill Passes," ANOTHER VIEW, 
Los Angeles Daily News, September 19,1990.
Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents, Office of the Federal 
Register, National Archives and Records Administration, Washington 
D.C., 1950 to present.
Witt, Howard, "Lawyers Press U.S. on Martial Law Plan," Chicago Tribune, 
August 15,1983.
128 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
Author's Note: The following report by Dr. Pabst concerning FEMA and 
concentration camps in the United States is photographed and printed exactly 
as written.
IN THE UNITED STATES
A National Emergency: Total Takeover
This is Dr. William R. Pabst. My address is 1434 West Alabama Street, Houston, 
Texas 77006. My telephone number is: area code 713 521-9896. This is my 1979 
updated reported on the concentration camp program of the Department of Defense of 
the United States.
On April 20, 1976, after a rapid and thorough investigation, I filed suit on 
behalf of the people of the United States against various personages that had a key 
part in a conspiratorial program to do away with the United States as we know it. This 
is a progress report to you, the plaintiffs, you, the People of the United States. The 
civil action number is 76-H-667. It is entitled, "Complaint Against the Concentration 
Camp Program of the Dept of Defense". It was filed in the U.S. District Court for the 
southern district of Texas, Houston division. The judge responsible for the case was 
Judge Carl Bue.
You have no doubt heard the story: Once upon a time, under the Nazi regime in 
Germany, a man worked on an assembly line in a baby carriage factory. His wife was 
going to have a baby, but the Nazi government would not let anybody buy a baby 
carriage. The man decided he would secretly collect one part from each department 
and assemble the carriage himself. When this was done he and his wife gathered up the 
pieces and assembled it. When they were finished they did not have a baby carriage; 
they had a machine gun.
And that is exactly the situation that I am going to present to you at this time. 
The Center for the Study for Democratic Institutions recently completed a proposed 
constitution for the "Newstates of America". The Center is Rockefeller funded. To give 
you an indication of the type of constitution proposed, the term "national emergency" 
is mentioned 134 times. The document did not have a Bill of Rights and the right to 
own arms was taken away. At the same time, House Concurrent Resolution #28 
awaited for calling a constitutional convention on or before July 4, 1976. The 
presiding officer of such an event would have been Nelson Rockefeller. Vice Presidenl 
and president pro tern of the Senate. This particular resolution awaited in committee. 
Obviously money would not be spent on these massive programs unless there would be 
the chance for the actual implementation of such a scheme.
However, in case the American people do not voluntarily adopt a new 
constitution less troublesome to those who desire dictatorship, there is Executive 
Order #11490. which will include its predecessors when it is cited herein. The 
Executive Order authorizes the secretaries of the various agencies to prepare for any 
"national emergency" type situation - including, but not limited to, those specified in 
the Executive Order itself. If you read the Order, there is nothing at all left to the 
imagination. For any conceivable pretense a national emergency may be declared based
2
Chapter Six H.R. 4079 & FEMA • 129
upon this frightening decree, dated October 1969. The Order itself was prefaced in 
March of '69 by another Executive Order which established the federal regions and 
their capitals. All the departments of the government were involved, including the 
L.E.A.A. (Law Enforcement Assistance Administration) and H.E.W. (Health, Education 
and Welfare). Congressman Larry McDonald has revealed to Congress that various 
guerrilla and terrorist groups were being financed by the federal government. If they 
(the terrorist groups) actually began insurgent activities, Executive Order #11490 
would be activated.
But as mentioned previously, if you will read Executive Order #11490, you
will see that a "national emergency" may he declared for any conceivable pretense
whatsoever. If the Order itself were activated, here is what would happen: The next
day you and your family would be standing in front of your local post office with your
neighbors; the front door bursting with block-long lines of people waiting to be
registered. After waiting in line with your family for hours, you finally get channeled
through the doors. Once inside, you overhear the postal clerk with his sidearm on
telling a frightened restrant, "Look, there is nothing I can do. The truck behind the
building will take you to a work camp where you have been assigned. Your wife has
been assigned to a factory and there's nothing I can do." Then your son or daughter
looks up at you with a quivering voice and asks, "Dad, why are we here?"
Implementing the New Government
Well, you see there's much more to life in a "free country" than paying your 
mortgage. You have to be aware of what is going on and act accordingly and 
participate in government; that is, get involved. Examining the organization chart on 
Executive Order #11490 to discover how we have all helped finance (through our tax 
dollars) the mechanics of the overthrow of our Constitution, Executive Order #11490 
designates certain authorities to the Office of Emergency Preparedness -- which in 
turn designates authority to the various departments of the federal government.
If Order were implemented, the Post Office Department would be responsible 
for a national registration. The State Department would be responsible for the 
protection of the United Nations personnel or properly and prevention of escape from 
the United States. The Department of Defense would be responsible for the 
expropriation of industry; direction of services and national production system; 
control of censorship; and communication expropriation of non-industrial facilities. 
The Commerce Department would be responsible for expropriation, selection and 
international distribution of commodities (which would be the actual looting of the 
United States), census information and human resources.
The Treasury Department would be responsible for collection of cash and noncash items and the re-creation of evidence of assets and liabilities. The Justice 
Department would have concurrent responsibility with the Department of State for 
prevention of escape from the United States: for replenishing the stockpile of 
narcotics; for a national police force: for correctional and penal institutions; for mass 
feeding and housing of prisoners and for use of prisoners to augment manpower 
which would be slave labor.
3
130 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
The Federal Bank (which is not a FEDERAL bank) would be responsible for 
regulation of withdrawal of currency. The G.S.A. (General Services Administration) 
would be responsible for confiscation of private property for government use. Health, 
Education and Welfare would be responsible for nationalization of education (which the 
Department of Education has already done), health services, hospitals and mental 
institutions. The Labor Department would be responsible for recruiting manpower; 
selecting manpower; referring manpower; and allocating manpower so each particular 
person that was registered at the post office in this national registration would be told 
where he (or she) was going to work. H.U.D. (Housing and Urban Debvelopment) would 
be responsible for transfer of persons to temporary or permanent housing in regional 
emergency planning and cooperation. The Transportation Department is responsible for 
emergency enforcement and control and movement of passengers and the emergency 
operation of the Alaska railroad.
There are two specific agencies here that we need to look at and to keep in 
mind. They are: H.E.W. and Justice (Department), as those two agencies are related to 
the Department of Defense; The various military departments are part of the 
Department of Defense. Under it, we have the Secretary of Army, Chief of Staff, 
Deputy Chief of Staff of Personnel and law enforcement, U.S. Army's forces 
command, and continental Army Reserve & National Guarkd. And under that we have 
the four armies dividing up the United States. Under the Fifth Army we have the 
provost marshal, who is directly connected to the Deputy Chief of Staff for law 
enforcement personnel. Under the provost marshal for the Fifth Army we have the 
300 Military Police Prisoner-of-War (POW) Command at Livonia, Michigan.
At this point I quote from retired Adm. Elmo Zumwalt's book, ON WATCH, 
Kissinger states, "I believe the American people lack the will to do the things 
necessary to achieve parity and to maintain maritime superiority. I believe we must 
get the best deal we can in our negotiations before the United States and the Soviets 
both perceive these changes and the balance that occurs. When these perceptions ara 
in agreement, and both sides know the U.S. is inferior, we must have gotten the best 
deal we can. Americans at that time will not be happy that I have settled for second, 
but it will be too late."
Zumwalt said, "Then why not take it to the American people? They will not 
accept the decision to become second best while we are in a position of Gross National 
Product twice that of the U.S.S.R."
Kissinger responds, "That's a question of judgement. I judge that we will not 
get their support, and if we seek it and tell that fact, as we would have to, we would 
loose our negotiating leverage with the Soviets."
Zumwalt stated, "But isn't that the ultimate immorality in a democracy; to 
make a decision for the people of such importance without consulting them?'
Kissinger stated, "Perhaps, but I doubt that there are 1 million who could even 
understand the issue."
Zumwalt responded, "Even if that presumtion is correct, those 1 million can
4
Chapter Six H.R. 4079 & FEMA • 131
influence the opinions of the majority of the people. I believe it is my duty to take the 
other course."
Kissinger responded, "You should take care, lest your words result in a 
reduction in the Navy budget."
So we see what the intention of the State Department is regarding the People. 
Another fact: On December 30, 1975, the California National Guard announced in a 
press release (which I have) that the state's Military Police battalions were organized 
and trained to provide immediate response to virtually every civil and man-made 
disaster, as well as to assist law enforcement officers in emergency situations; to 
carry out their law enforcement as well as their military mission. When I asked four 
of the defendants in this case for their mission statement they did not provide it - 
although they say it is public information.
The training spoken of for the California National Guard covers such subjects 
as dealing with individual civilians/civil population, detention procedures, citizen's 
rights, and similar matters. And you know as well as I do that, when there is Martial 
Law, or Martial Rule, citizens have no rights - because the Constitution is pre-empted. 
Even the uniforms of the National Guards who participate in this program are different 
from the regular uniforms. Army spokesman will not reveal more about the uniforms. 
But the Los Angeles Sheriffs Department para-military units, who have received this 
training also, have army fatigues dyed black for their uniforms.
A further fact is the disaster preparedness plan for the Marine Corp Supply
Center in Barstow, California. Quoting from that document" "Under the Constitution
and the laws of the United States, the preservation of law and order is the
responsibility of local and state government. And the authority to maintain the peace
and enforce the law is invested in the authorities of those goverments." There are
specific exemptions to the above concept. One of these pertains to federal intervention
to civil disturbances in certain situations. Military commanders are deemed to have
the inherent authority to take any measure reasonably necessary for the protection of
life and property in the event of a sudden unexpected public calamity which dirupts the
normal process of government and presents an emergency so eminent as to make it
 dangerous to await instructions from appropriate authorities. This includes Law 
Enforcement duties. The manual mentions something called "Garden Plot Forces," 
which we will discuss at length in a few minutes.
Don Bell (who writes a weekly report) reported on July 25, 1975, that in May 
of 1975, the 303 Civil Affaires group of the U.S. Army Reserves in Kearny, New 
Jersey, conducted an exercise to sharpen plans for a military takeover of the state 
government in New Jersey. According to Colonel Frances Clark, they had conducted 
similar studies on how to seize municipal and county government over the past few 
years. But this was the first time they had studied STATE government. Such units 
were trained during World War II to operate captured governments in the foreign. We
 never had federal troops trining to take over governments in the United States. When 
local violence or catastrophe struck, the National Guard - under command of the 
governor - went into action. This is definitely not the situation at this time.............................
Controlling the Masses
5
132 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
On February 16, 1975, in the SAN GABRIEL VALLEY TRIBUNE, it was reported 
that the L.E.A.A. (funded by the Department of Justice) and the Police Foundation 
(funded by the Ford Foundation) are prime movers toward implementing a national 
police force. Each, however, contends they support local police agencies. The total 
program invoices military units that have the function of taking over the administration of local and state governments. That program is "Operation Cable Splicer" - 
by Army civil affairs groups, a sub-plan of "Operation Garden Plot" (the Martial Law 
program).
The method by which the national police concept is being presented to the public 
has changed. It was first disguised under the cover of protection against civil 
disturbances. This program was as follows:
A. Keep the people from gathering in the streets.
B. Isolate and neutralize the revolution's leadership. 
G Dispersal of crowds and demonstrators.
This is followed by successful prosecution in order to: (1) Validate the action 
of police; (2) Denying the arrestees propaganda materials; and (3) Denying them the 
opportunity to recover money damages against the police for arresting them.
Let me quote for you the scenario which was developed for Cable Splicer One, 
Two and Three, to justify the needs for dealing with civil disturbances: "Phase One: 
an arrest and shooting provoke crowd unrest and threats against public officials and a 
riot begins to form. Phase Two: police vehicles are ambushed, various attempted 
assasinations of public officials occur, destruction and raiding of armories occur, and 
thousands of people begin to gather and local police loose control. Phase Three: 
increased movement of rioters and the crowds must be dispursed before they become 
sympathetic with the rioters. The National Guard and the local police loose control."
This scenario provides for an orderly transition from state to federal control. 
The Deputy Attorney General of California commented, at a Cable Splicer Three 
conference, that anyone who attacks the State - even verbally - becomes a 
revolutionary and an enemy by definition. They are the enemy and must be destroyed. 
This program was taught in almost every state west of the Mississippi River and 
included as participants local active military, reserve military, and civilian police. 
The course name was "Civil Emergency Management Course". The official explanation 
that was to be given, if any questions were asked about the program, was: "This 
activity is a continuous, joint law enforcement-military liaison effort and a 
continuation of coordination established last year."
In 1976, the OAKLAND TRIBUNE carried the most complete explanation of what 
is planned. It is reported in it entirety in the NATIONAL CHRONICLE which added an 
analysis to the story. (The OAKLAND TRIBUNE'S editor died suddenly after the story 
was published.) And, I quote:
Last Saturday the California National Guard unveiled a new Law 
Enforcement Assistance Force - L.E.A.F., a specially trained and
6
Capter Sx H.R. 4079 & FEMA • 133
outfitted Military Police unit, whose members will serve as shock 
-troups in the state's war against political protesters and 
demonstrators.
I saw a full-dress exhibition of what the California National Guard has 
planned for the next American revolution. Helicopters, SWAT teams, 
civilian military policemen in jack boots and helmets, twelve-guage 
shotguns, .38 and .45 caliber pistols, radios, walkie talkies, and 
electrically-controlled intelligence centers wired for instant 
communications with any police force in the state.
L.E.A.F. is a 1000-member unit put together this year to handle unique 
law enforcement problems, such as mass civil disobedience, protest 
demonstrations and riots. In other words, breaking heads and taking 
names. L.E.A.F. has the support of Governor Brown, a quarter-million 
dollard worth of grants from the federal government, and no public 
opposition from civil liberties groups.
For all its ineptitude, however, L.E.A.F. has a frightening possibility 
from a civil liberty standpoint. It is a direct product of the California 
"Cable Splicer" conferences - a series of high-level secret meetings 
between government officials, lawy nforcement officers, and military 
planners held during the late '60s and early '70s. The meetings were 
held as late as 1975, so far as many public records show. These were 
the conferences which COUNTER-SPY magazine had identified as 
California's "Garden Plot Sub-Plan:.
Gary Davis, Governor Brown's righthand man, says L.E.A.F. is to 
assist civil police not to replace them. Gary says, "Civilians could 
expect a civilian type law enforcement rather than what is commonly 
known as Martial Law." Despite this assurance, L.E.A.F.'s exercises 
look disturbingly like the military coup described in the novel, SEVEN 
DAYS IN MAY.
L.E.A.F. soldiers with nightsticks sood at intersections, stopping cars 
with suspicious occupants, checking I.D. cards and generally intimidating 
onlookers with their SWAT style uniforms, their sidearms and helmets. 
Perhaps more ominously, several participants in the role-playing 
exercises Saturday admitted that, even under simulated pressure, 
there has already been a number of incidents where the L.E.A.F. troops 
used excessive force to quell disturbances - even though their orders 
forbade it." (End of quote.)
Former L.E.A.FA administrator, Charles Rosgovin, is on record as having
stated that local law enforcement has failed and must be replaced by a national police
force. Patrick Murphy, the administrator of the Police Foundation, states, "I have no
fear of a national police force. Our 40,000 police departments are not sacred." Ex
Attorney General, William Saxby, warned that, if we can go on as we are, crime will
invade us and the national police will take over.
7
134 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
For the policemen who do not cooperate and still want to be policemen, there is 
the program of Contemporary Research, Inc. - and organization of psychologists, 
sociologists, education specialists and economic experts - who work toward a solution 
of many of today's social problems. The same organization develops specialized 
computer programming for the new world-wide military command and control 
system, as well as computer base systems for law enforcement agencies at all levels 
of government.
The L.E.A.A. alone will receive over a billion dollars a year over the next 4 
years - even though it has been ineffective against crime. This is because the L.E.A.A. 
is not geared to fighting crime; it's geared to developing a system for takeover of the 
United States with the assistance of the Department of Defence.
The Planned Police State
One of the programs the L.E.A.A. works on in its fight against crime is psychosurgery. If you don't cooperate with their programs, you are merely operated on so 
that you be as cooperative as an adding machine. Or, the L.E.A.A. supports drug 
research for the same purpose - to neutralize neurological sources of violence. Hence, 
as an example, if a law were passed whereby the ownership of firearms was declared 
to be illegal, you would be placed in one of these programs if you did not cooperate. 
The L.E.A.A. control exercise (at the state's level) is from the Office of Criminal 
Justice Planning of the Governor's Office. Here in Texas, Mr. Robert C. Flowers is 
still the executive director in that office. But all states have that particular 
department.
In May 1975, the L.E.A.A. NEWSLETTER describes the function of one of its 
organizations: the National Institute of Law Enforcement & Criminal Justice. This 
organization funds something called the "United Nations Clearinghouse" in Rome, Italy. 
The function of that organization is, among other things, the exchange of Criminal 
Justice System information with the Soviet Union. And it goes without saying that we 
have nothing to learn from the Criminal Justice System of the Soviet Unition. These 
incredible projects are being funded with our tax dollars.
The code name for these projects are: "Garden Plot" and "Cable Splicer". 
Garden Plot is the program to control the population. Cable Splicer is the program for 
an orderly takeover of the state and local governments by the federal government.
An investigation was completed in November 1975 by 4 sources: the 
Conservative publication AMERICAN CHALLENGE; the leftist NEW TIMES; the 
foundation financed FUND FOR INVESTIGATIVE JOURNALISM; and Don Wood of the 
trustworthy OZARK SUNBEAM. It involves the potential creation of a Police State 
through the use of the Pentagon and its computerized intelligence dossier (lodged in the 
Pentagon basement) of thousands of citiaens by the National Guard, state and local 
police departments, the L.E.A.A., plain-clothes military forces, SWAT teams, and the 
Department of Justice.
8
Chapter Six H.R. 4079 & FEMA • 135
Brig. Gen. J.L. Julenic. senior Army officer of the Pentagon National Guard 
Bureau, has admitted, "I know of no state that did not have some form of these 
exercises within the last year."
Today the Cable Splicer handbook is composed of 6 loose-leaf 3-ring binders 
that are merely an outline for the impending takeover and destruction of our 
Constitution. The Sixth Army used the term "Cable Splicer" for the name of the 
operation, but it has not revealed the name of the operation in the other military areas 
within the U.S.
On page 4, paragraph 10, on Public Information, the instructions state: "As a 
means to prevent adverse publicity or misleading psychological effects in regard to 
coordinating, planning, and conducting this exercise, all military participants involved 
will perform such duties in civilian clothing when exercise oriented activities are 
conducted at law enforcement facilities. In the event inquiries are received regarding 
this exercise, the response should be limited to identifying the activity as a 
continuous, joint law enforcement-military liaison effort and a continuation of 
coordination established last year." On page 6, security guidance is explained to the 
effect that if anybody asks any questions, limit the information that is given out on 
the basis of it being in the interest of "national interest" (security).
Now, in the festivities celebrating the success of completion of the exercises,
Gen. Stanly R. Larsen, the commanding general of the Sixth Army stated, "The most
serious challenge facing all of us will be the challenge of discharging our legitimate
responsibilities. For a significant portion of a soiety at large is likely to regard us
with suspicion and to question, even challenge our authority on the basic assumption of
out profession. Part of this challenge we must be prepared to deal with; a potentially
dangerous portion of our society which, in truth, could well become the domestic
enemy.
The manual includes instructions on operation of confinement facilities,
handling and processing prisoners - including searching, transporting,, feeding,
housing and handling of the special class of persons called "detainees". The plan also
specifically includes a proposition for confiscation of privately-owned weapons and
ammunition.
Files on Potential Prisoners
The Army has over 350 separate record centers containing substantial
information on civilian-political activities. Virtually every major Army unit has its
own set aside from this. The Fifth Army of San Antonio has over 100,000 files of its
own. The overall operation command post is a domestic room at the Pentagon. There
are 25 million cards on individuals and 760.000 on organizations held by the Defense
Central Index of investigations alone. And this information includes political,
sociological, economic and psychological profiles. All this type of information on 25
million Americans.
Since 1970, local county and state police forces all over the country have
9
136 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
undertaken crash programs to install various kinds of computerized information 
systems. A large portion of this is being paid for by the LE.A.A. Beginning in 1970, 
Congress and the Joint Chiefs of Staff ordered the destruction of all these data banks, 
but thev were not destroyed. All the outlawed collection is now located at Mt. 
Weather. Clark County. West Virginia and similar Pentagon facilities designed as 
adjuncts to the president's emergency powers under the Executive Orders.
The cadre of specialized persons to enforce this plan are found in the U.S. 
Army Reserves-Military Police POW Command at Livonia, Michigan. Mr. Fennerin, of 
the 300th Military Police POW Command, at Livonia, told me, when I called him from 
the Federal Information Center at Houston, that the camps in the Command were for 
foreign prisonsers-of-war and for "enemies of the United States". I asked him if 
enemies of the United States included U.S. citizens. He became angry, wouldn't deny it, 
and referred me to a very sinister individual at the Army Reserve facility here at 
Houston who I talked to; who explained to me that the prisoners were called 
"inventory" and "internees". He would not deny that the camps were for U.S. citizens.
I called the Pentagon, spoke with the defendant there, and then with the 
provost marshal for the Fifth Army, and do you know what? Not one of these persons 
would deny that the system was for U.S. citizens. The provost marshal for the Fifth 
Army - when I mentioned the names of all the camp sites - said, "Well at least you've 
got that right."
The names of the detention facilities that I gave him were a list that I had 
acquired from the OZARK SUNBEAM. That list of names was the same list of facilities 
designated under the old Detention Act of 1950 as "emergency detention centers". But 
there is only one problem: That act was supposed to have been repealed in 1971. 
After some research, I found out what the problem was. One congressman - when the 
hearings were held for the repeal of the Emergency Detention Act - mentioned that 
there am 17 other bits of law that provided for the same thing. So it didn't matter 
whether they ever repealed the Emergency Detention Act. The public was in fact 
tricked by the Congress of the United States!
Here are the designated sites: Tucked away in the Appalachian Mountains of 
centeral Pennsylvania is a bustling town of approximately 10,000 people. Fifteen to 
twenty years ago it was a sleepy village of 400. Allanwood, Pennsylvania is linked to 
New York City by Interstate 80. It takes up approximately 400 acres and Is 
surrounded by a 10-foot barb-wire fence. It now holds approximately 300 minimum 
security prisoners to keep it in shape. It could hold 12.000 people from one day to the 
next.
Thirty miles from Oklahoma City, on U.S.66, is El Reno, Oklahoma with an 
approximate population of 12,000. Due west, 6 miles from town, almost in sight of 
U.S.66, is a complex of buildings which could pass for a small school. However, the 
facility is overshadowed by a guard house which appears to be something like an 
airport control tower - except that it's manned by a vigilant, uniformed guard. This a 
federal prison camp or detention center. These camps are all located near super 
-highways or near railroad tracks or both.
10
Chapter Six H.R. 4079 & FEMA • 137
The federal proson at Florence, Arizona could hold 3,500 prisoners. It is 
presently kept in condition by approximately 400 legally convicted prisoners. 
Wickenburg, Arizona is famous for its municipal airport, which was once government 
owned. It is now occupied by a private party. It is rumored to be capable of being 
taken beck by the federal government without notice.
Now there are a couple other of these facilities which are probably existing 
under the same arrangements. This particular rumor of instant taking back without 
notice has existed for about 9 or 10 years. The only way it can actually be established 
is by looking at the local contract for the Wickenburg Municipal Airport itself, and the 
parties that have possession of it.
As I mentioned previously, these names were ratified by the provost marshal 
of the Fifth Army, who is in charge of the 300th Military Police POW Command. He is 
the one who verified them. He said, as I mentioned before, "Well at least you've got 
that right."
Some of the other locations are: Tule Lake, in California - now in private 
hands. It can be retaken without notice. Some of the others: we have Mill Point, West 
Virginia. I couldn't find a thing on Mill Point, but in that area we have all kinds of 
prisons. Among them are: Alderson, West Virginia, a woman's federal reformatory; 
Lewisburg, West Virginia, a federal prison; Greenville, South Carolina, in Greenville 
County, is now occupied by the State Youthful Offenders Division. Even that is a 
mystery to the people of the area.
At Montgomery, Alabama, we have a federal civilian prison camp at Mazwell 
Air Force Base. Now does that sound right? There's one at Tuscon, Arizona, David 
Munson Air Base. In Alaska, we have Elmendorf at Eielson Air Force Base.
And that brings us to a facility in Florida called Avon Park, Florida. I sent a 
representative to see what was at Avon Park. He found the Avon Park Bombing and 
Gunnery Range, which is also listed as the 56th Combat Support Squadron of the U.S. 
Air Force; which is also listed as the Avon Park Correctional Institute. No one is 
permitted entrance and probably there is no overfly permitted because it is a bombing 
and gunnery range. This was one of the places ratified by the provost marshal of the 
Fifth Army.
In 1976, as well as on March 20, 1979, I went to the Sheriffs Dept in Houston 
to see if our local Sheriffs Dept had been infiltrated by these plans. Well, it appears 
so. I was put in contact with a Lt. Kiljan, who is in charge of some secret unit in the 
department. I asked him if he had participated in military training or in training with 
military personnel here in the Sheriff's Department. He denied it and, when I asked 
him if he would testify so under oath he became angry and stated, "You are just an 
ordinary citizen. I don't have to tell you anything." I later descovered that Lt. Kiljan is 
the ex-director of the Houston branch office of the U.S. Secret Service. Now where 
does his money come from? The area is administered by the Houston-Galveston Area 
Council.
In this regional-government plan, each federal region is divided into state
11
138 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
clearinghouses, and each state clearinghouse is divided into area clearinghouses. And 
for our area we have the Houston-Galveston Area Council. It serves as a conduit for 
federal funds in two major areas: L.E.A.A. and H.E.W.
Most everbody thinks this organization (the Houston-Galveston Area Council) is 
for the development of the area - the geographical area here in Houston. But it is not. 
It is for the development of L.E.A.A. and H.E.W. projects. Now this finds its 
counterpart in every community across the U.S. It provides for these agencies a 
liaison for inter-governmental communications, interaction and coordination
Mental Cooperation in Takeover Plans
I examined their projects to see what they were doing. This regionalgovernment program distributes federal funds for two major purposes: (1) Radio 
hookups between every police agency in the state to For Sam Houston: and (2) Mental 
health programs, including programs for the mentally ill having priority of beds and 
hospitals.
Another interesting fact to consider is that in the Pine Bluff Arkansas Arsenal 
"B-Z" is stored. It's a nerve gas which creates sleepiness, dizziness, stupor, and the 
incapacity to move about. According to the Associated Press, the agent can be 
sprayed by aerosol, injected or sprayed over large areas by a bomb. The Military has 
admitted that one potential use of the gas is for civilian control. So, whatever they 
have planned, they've also planned a way for you to go to your destination in a 
tranquil state of mind.
H.E.W., by law, is operated in conjunction with the United Nations through the 
World Health Organization. Back In 1948, the International Congress on Mental Health 
- a U.N. organization - declared in its pamphlet, MENTAL HEALTH AND WORLD 
CITIZENSHIP, that "prejudice, hostility or excessive nationalism may become deeply 
imbedded in the developing personality without awareness on the part of the individual 
concerned. In order to be effective, efforts of changing individuals must be 
appropriate to the successive stages of the unfolding personality. While in case of a 
group of society, change will be strongly resisted unless an attitude of acceptance has 
first been engendered.
"Principles of mental health cannot be successfully furthered in any society 
unless there is progressive acceptance of the concept of world citizenship." the 
document states. "Programs for social change to be effective require a joint effort of 
psychiatrists and social scientists, working together in cooperation with statesmen, 
administrators and others in positions of responsibility."
The three phases of the development are: (1) Mental hospitals for segregation, 
care and protection of persons of unsound minds; (2) Community Mental Health Care 
Centers, so that persons may be treated in their own neighborhoods; and (3) Child 
Care Centers for dealing with early difficulties of nationalism in a child's life.
Two years earlier, Maj. Gen. G.B. Chisholm, Deputy Minister of Health In
12
Chapter Six H.R. 4079 & FEMA • 139
Canada - who later became director of United Nations World Health Organization 
- explained, "Self defense may involve a neurotic reaction when it means defending 
one's own excessive material wealth from others who are in great need. This attitude 
leads to war." 
So his solution to the problem is: Let's redistribute the wealth among everyone.
Further, the reinterpretation and eventual eradication of the individual's 
concept of right and wrong - which has been the basis of child training - are the 
belated objectives of practically all effective psychotherapies. Now, if we digress 
even further, to Buria (phonetic spelling), the director of the Soviet Secret Police, in 
the 1930s, we see that he explained the communist political strategy through the use 
of "mental healings" of psychiatry:
"Psycho-politics is the art and science of asserting and of maintaining a 
dominion over the thoughts and loyalties of individuals, officers, bureaus, and masses. 
and the effecting of the conquest of enemy nations through mental healing. You must 
work," he stated, "until every teacher of psychology unknowingly or knowlingly 
teaches only communistic doctrine under the guise of psychology."
If you look at the Russian manual of instruction of psycho-political warfare, we
see in chapter 9, "Psycho-political operations should at all times be alert to the
oportunities to organize for the betterment of the community mental health centers."
Now, under the new national Mental Health program at this moment there are 
more than 600 of these community mental health centers across the United States. 
The whole thing was promoted by Dr. Stanly F. Yolles, who was the director of the 
National Institute of Mental Health in 1969. And, he stated back then that the newest 
trend treating mental illness is care at local health care centers, where the patient 
is not Isolated from his (or her) family and friends. They have been working on this 
program for 46 years publicly and, now across the U.S. - through your tax dollars 
- you have 603 centers (to be exact); Community Health Centers that are all part of 
this program.
And this is how they are part of the program. (It has already happened): In the
mid-1950s, there was set into motion an interesting chain of events. About 1956, the
Alaska Mental Health Bill was proposed and later passed. It granted approximately
$12 million and 1 million acres of public land to Alaska so that it could develop its own
metnal health program. Now, this was a little abnormal since Alaska only had a little
over 400 people who were classified as mentally ill!
After the bill was passed, Alaska passed its own, enabling legislation to get
into the mental health business. They started by adopting the essential elements of the
Public Health Service Draft Act on the hospitalization of the mentally ill in the old
"Interstate Compact on Mental Health" - now called the Uniform Mental Health Act.
There were no provisions for jury trial in it or anything else. You would just be picked
up and taken to the Alaskan-Siberian Asylum - incommunicado - and the state would
also confiscate all of your personal and real propertyl And they actually tried to do it
as 1954 in the case of Ford vs. Milinak, which declared the act as adopted in another
state (the state of Missouri) as unconstitutional.
13
140 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
But the act itself still exists - and modified - but essentially in the same form, 
the Uniform Mental Health Act, to which approximately 6 states subscribe. And, in 
passing month State Constitutions - if you will check them from the period of 1935 - 
made a part of their constitution the practice of having a person submit to a 90-day 
mental examination to determine his (or her) sanity, without any provisions for a 
trial by jury. This was part of the national program at that time.
In this act, the governor could have anyone picked up and sent to the Mental 
Health Institution in Alaska or elsewhere. The results, as rumors, back in the 1950s, 
were that there was in fact a sinister, Frankenstein-type mental health prison in 
Alaska. I wrote to Alaska (the officials that is) and asked them for a description of the 
land of 1 million acres that they were eligible to receive, under the Alaska Mental 
Health Act. And I also asked them for a copy of the inventory they ran for their 
facilities back at that same time. Well, so far no answer. And probably I will never 
receive an answer without a court order.
But through the years, there was a spot in Alaska that was continually 
referred to: Southeast of Fairbanks; Southwest of Fairbanks; northwest of Fairbanks 
- somewhere near Fairbanks. Then I received information that a pilot had flown over 
the area once and had had his license revoked. And so, for $1.85 each, I ordered the 
low-level navigation maps from the federal government for Alaska and located the 
Alaska-Siberian Asylum for the treatment of enemies of the United States. It's right 
where rumor over the past 20 years had placed it: Southeast of Fairbanks. It stands 
out like a sore thumb! It's the only one of that geometric configuration within the state of 
Alaska, and you will note a black line running up through Fairbanks and down over near 
that area of the map. That is the railroad that the Department of Transportation would 
take the emergency operation of, under the Executive Order - if the Excecutive Order 
went into effect. And H.E.W. would be responsible for making a dermination of whether 
or not you were mentally disturbed because of your nationalistic tendencies, your 
love for the United States, or your adherence to any political or religious doctrine.
But let's look a little further into the type of program that the L.E.A.A. Is 
paying for through the Department of Justice, the Federal Bureau of Prisons - located 
in the back woods of North Carolina, near a tiny village called Butner - is constructing 
a mammoth 42-acre research complex for prisoners from throughout the East. Who 
will be sent for experiments to test new behaviorial programs and techniques? Target 
date for completion of the entire system is ironically 1984.
And so, they're using right now, under the L.E.A.A. program, something called 
anectine. Punishment for troublesome behavior within the prison Is being done by 
drugs and shock, likely to be the most selected examples of programs that have made 
use of anectine - a derivative of South American curari. Anectine was originally used 
as a beginning factor to electro-convulsive shock. Such shocks applied to the head are 
so strong they can break and graze bones under the strain of resulting muscle 
contractions. Since anectine paralyzed the muscles without dampening consciousness 
or the ability to feel pain, by first injecting the inmates with it, researchers can turn 
up the voltage as high as they want without cracking the inmate's skeleton when his 
body is thrown into convulsions by the jolt.
14
Chapter Six H.R. 4079 & FEMA • 141
What the anectine does, in short, is to simulate death within 30 to 40 seconds 
of injection. It brings on paralysis first, with the small rapidly moving muscles in the 
nose, fingers and eyes, and then in the diaphram and the cardiovascular system. As a 
result, the patient cannot move or breath and yet remains fully conscious, as though 
drowning and dying. This from the 1974 publication, HUMAN BEHAVIOR.
The People vs. the Conspirators
The federal government answered my suit, in June (1976), by filing an 
unsworn general denial of everything that I had alleged. I spoke with the assistant U.S. 
Attorney in charge of the case and asked him if he had gone to the trouble to call any 
of the parties mentioned in the suits - since I had provided not only the addresses, but 
their telephone numbers to provide a faster means of investigation. He said he had not. 
He had not even done a minimal amount of investigation of the case, but yet he filed a 
denial of my allegations.
I filed a motion, in the mean time, to take the deposition of the person who 
writes the training programs for the concentration cam guards, Mr. Richard Burrage - 
the 75th Maneuver Air Command at Army Reserve Center at Houston, Texas - stating 
the, in light of all the recent activity of government agents, one of the agencies 
involved might attempt to murder this key witness, the author of the training camp 
program. The federal judge denied my motion, stating that I had not quoted enough 
cases to him justifying my request. However, he was also aware that there were no 
cases existing on this set of facts but, as you will see as I go along with this report, 
he chose to ignore it.
I then made an agreement with the assistant U.S. Attorney to take the
deposition of Mr. Buirrage. After I'd made the arrangements, the U.S. Attorney
refused to voluntarily go along with taking the deposition. It is very difficult to find
justice in our system of courts. Law is usually practiced by the "buddy system," 
hence the court rules are overlooked or not followed.
On July 29, a hearing was held at the magistrate of Norman Black, U.S. 
District Court in Houston. The courtroom was completely filled with spectators. And 
although the news media had been contacted, no representatives of the press were 
there. There is a new media blackout on this matter here in Houston.
Brief oral arguments were presented. The U.S. Attorney explained that I was
not the proper person to bring the suit because, although the free exercise of my
constitutional rights was threatened by the concentration camp program, as alleged, it
did not constitute my injury. The magistrate was impressed with the information I had
thus far collected and stated that he would bring it to the attention of the federal
judge. The U.S. Attorney tried to have my investigation of the case halted, but the
magistrate would not go along that far with a pre-arranged decision.
As an additional indication of what I was up against, the original hearing was 
scheduled for 10:30 in the morning. However, the U.S. Attorney secretly had the time
15
142 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
changed to 2:30 in the afternoon. The magistrate gave the U.S. Attorney permission to 
file for motion to dismiss because he felt that the concentration camp program - to be 
used for persons who exercise their freedom of speech - did not present any injury.
Now, on July 23, I had placed in the HOUSTON POST and in the HOUSTON 
CHRONICLE newspapers the following advertisement in the legal section: "Solicitation 
for witnesses in Civil Action 78-H-667, Federal District Court of Houston, People Ex 
Rel. William Pabst vs. Gerald Ford et al. The action titled: Complaint Against the 
Concentration Camp Program of the Department of Defense. Attention: If you have 
participated in Operation Garden Plot, Operation Cable Splicer, the 300th Military 
Police Prisoner of War Command, or the Army Reserve Civil Affairs group, you may 
be involved in a program that needs to be disclosed for this suit. To give your 
testimony call or write, (and here I placed my name, address and telephone number)."
As I previously mentioned, there is a news media blackout on the story here in 
Houston. Both newspapers refused to carry the ad. First, at the HOUSTON POST, I had 
to threaten them with a law suit to carry out the ad, even though I was paying for it. 
And then at the HOUSTON CHRONICLE, I had to meet with the president and various 
vice presidents because a refusal from that paper had come up from their own 
lawyers. Both nespapers finally carried it, but only after two days of complaining. 
The initial response of both papers was, "We don't carry stories like that" and "Don't 
you think that the people planning the concentration camps have our best interests in 
mind?" As you will hear for yourselves, the policies definitely do not reflect our best 
interests.
The next event that occurred was that the U.S. Attorney filed a "Statement ot 
Authority," showing the reasons that he could find why I should not be allowed to take 
depositions to get more information from the person who was writing the 
concentration camp guard training program. However, his brief was completely filled 
with misquotes of the law from many cases. He would mention the case and then 
invent whatever the case should say. In my brief to the court, at this point, I notified 
the judge of the violation of the law requiring honesty in such matters. But the 
notification was ignored by the judge, who apparently sanctioned this most dishonest 
of acts commonly known as "quoting out of context".
The Geneva Convention
My brief was filed in August 31, formal arguments were set. The new 
courtroom of the magistrate was almost filled again. However, no one from the news 
media showed up for this hearing either. The few who were contacted had been told 
not to go; they would loose their jobs.
At the hearing, I introduced evidence that heretofore had never been introduced 
in any court of law in the U.S. The U.S. Attorney had denied, you will remember, 
everything in my suit without so much as even a tiny investigation. So I introduced 
into evidence the following letter from the Department of the Army, Office of the 
Deputy Chief of Staff of Personnel, signed by one B. Sergeant, Col. G.S., Acting 
Director of Human Resources Development.
16
Chapter Six H.R. 4079 & FEMA • 143
The letter states, "On behalf of President Ford, I am replying to your letter 27 
May, 1976, regarding a new article in the DALLAS MORNING NEWS. As much as he 
would like to, the president cannot reply personally to every communication he 
receives. Therefore, he has asked the departments and agencies of the federal 
government in thos instances where they have special knowledge or special authority 
underlogued.
"For this reason your communication was forwarded to officials of the 
Department of Defense. Within the Department of Defense, the Army is responsible for 
custody and treatment of enemy prisoners of war and civilian internees as defined
under terms of the Geneva Convention of 1949. Therefore, the Army is prepared to 
detain prisoners of war and aetainees as defined in Article IV of the 1949 Geneva
Convention relative to the treatment of prisoners of war and protection of civilian 
persons.
"It is U.S. policy that its Armed Forces adhere to the provisions of 
international law to set the example for other countries of the world to follow and 
respecting the rights and dignity of those who become victim of international conflict. 
It should be noted that the Army program is designed for implementation during 
conditions of war between the U.S. and one or more foriegn countries. The Army had 
no plans nor does it maintain detention camps to imprison American citizens during 
domestic crises."
The problem with this letter is that it's not true, and that's why I'm going to
discuss it at this point. First of all, in verifying the authenticity of the claims in the
letter, l checked the Geneva text. There is no article in the Geneva Convention entitled
as the letter states. There is, however, on each one of the classifications: "Protection
of War Victims/Civilian Persons" and a separate article on "Prisoners of War". That
was the first discrepancy.
Then I turned to Article IV of the Geneva Convention. That article did not set up 
any requirements or authorizations for military units of any type and does not even 
suggest it. Hence, the second discrepancy.
The next problem with the letter from President Ford's representative is that
it states that the prisoner of war guard program is set up for the implementation for
"conditions of war between the U.S. and one or more (foreign) countries." However,
Article III of the Geneva Convention reads that the treaty applies to (and I am quoting)
"in case of an armed conflict, not of an international character, occurring within the
territory of one of the high contracting parties." Obviously an armed conflict
occurring within one's own territory did not mean between one or more of the parties
to the treaty, especially if only one is involvedkkkk. Now, the examples of this type of
conflict are: civil war, armed insurgency and guerilla activities. In other words,
they're speaking of a domestic conflict.
An even more shocking item is found in the last pages of the 1949 Geneva
Convention under "Protection of War Victims/Civilian Persons". You will find the
index card, the identification card, forms to be used to writing your family, and
i/
144 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
everything necessary for the administration of a concentration camp is contained in 
this treaty that the U.S. signed and ratified. Further, if there is a conflict in the U.S. 
involving only the U.S. this convention or treaty can go into operation - which includes 
the procedures for setting up the concentration camps.
Article LXVIII of the Convention states (and I paraphrase): If you commit an 
offense that is soley intended to harm the occupying power, not harming the life or 
limb of members of the occupying power, but merely talking against such a force - 
such as Martial Law situation _ you can be imprisoned provided that the duration of 
such imprisonment is proportionate to the offense committed. Well, President Dwight 
Eisenhower didn't feel that provision was strong enough. So he had the following 
additions placed in the treaty which states: "The U.S. reserves the right to impose the 
death penalty in accordance with the provisions of Article LXVIII without regard to 
whether the offenses referred to therein are punishable by death under the law of the 
occupied territory at the time the occupation begins.."
So not only can you be imprisoned for having exercised freedom of speech; you 
can be put to death under the provisions of the Geneva Convention in 1949 for having 
exercised, or attempting to exercise freedom of speech.
The next item that I introduced into evidence was a field manual: FM 41-10, 
CIVIL AFFAIRS OPERATION. You will remember at the outset that I mentioned Civil 
Affairs groups. Let me quote to you from that manual what one of the functions of the 
Civil Affairs activities includes: "Item 4. Assumption of full or partial executive, 
legislative and judicial authority over a country or area". So let's see what a 
"country or area" is defined as in the same manual. It includes: "small towns in rural 
areas, municipalities of various population sizes, districts, counties, provinces or 
states, regions of national government".
Nowhere in the manual does it exclude this program from being put into effect 
right here in the United States. As a matter of fact, in Kearny, New Jersey, the Civil 
Affairs group went into that area and practiced taking over that government unit. And 
yet the Army - in its letter of June 16 - states that these programs are not for us. 
Yet they are practiced here in the United States under conditions that can only occur 
here at home.
The study outline of field manual, FM 41-10, on page j-24, under "Penal 
Institutions 1-B," you see there is a program on concentration camps and labor camps 
- number, location and capacity. It is important to note that a concentration camp and 
labor camp are always located near eather other for obvious reasons.
Again on page d-4 of the same manual, you'll find a sample receipt for seized 
property; a sample receipt written English and containing terminology applicable to 
only U.S. territory.
On page 8-2 of the same manual, under the heading "Tables of Organization and 
Equipment," we find that there are 3 other organizations that would be working along 
with the Civil Affairs operation: the Chemical Service Organization, the Composite 
Service Organization, and the Psychological Operations Organization, along with lh» 
various Civil Affairs organizations.
18
Chapter Six H.R. 4079 & FEMA • 145
In July of that year (1976), the following Civil Affairs groups met with the 
following airborne groups at a staging area in Fort Chaffee, Arkansas. A staging area 
is where military units meet before they go into action. They met with the 32nd 
Airborne and part of the 101st Airborne; the 321st Civil Affairs group of San 
Antonio, Texas headquarters; the 362nd Civil Affairs brigade from Dallas, Texas; the 
431st Civil Affairs company from Little Rock, Arkansas headquarters; the 306th 
Civil Affairs group, and William Highlin. The 486th Civil Affairs company from Tilsa, 
Oklahoma; the 418th Civil Affairs company from Kansas City, Missouri; the 307th 
Civil Affairs group from St. Louis, Missouri; the 490th Civil Affairs group from 
Abilene, Texas; the 413th company from Hammon, Louisiana; the 12th S.S. group, 2nd 
Battalion (headquarters unknown).
They're ready to go into action. The problem is, as it appears, they were ready 
to lake over the entire government of the United States as their mission set out. One 
man who attended this staging area talked to a Civil Affairs Sgt. and asked him what 
his job was. The Sgt. explained that the civilians of this country will reaiiy be 
surprised some day when the Civil Affairs groups begin to operate the government.
Now, the Department of the Army still maintains that all this is not for the
United States - yet this training continues here for us. The evidence is overwhelming;
the plan exists for the imprisonment of millions of U.S. citizens. And even though all
this information was presented to the federal magistrate, he still felt that no one was
injured by such a plot.
On the 2nd day of September, 1976, the magistrate recommended to the 
federal judge that the case be dismissed. And the sole basis for his reasoning to 
dismiss was that we have to be actually physically injured before we can maintain a 
law suit of this type. He did not feel that, although all this active planning, preparation 
and training was going on, that any U.S. citizen had been injured - even though the 
citizen may fear exercising his (or her) freedom for fear of being detained and 
imprisoned in a concentration camp at a later date.
Ignoring the Constitution
The case of Tatum vs. Laird, heard before the Supreme Court in 1974, is a 
case in point. It involved the Army intelligence collecting aparatus, which was 
developing a list of names of persons whom the Army felt were troublesome. The 
Supreme Court held that the making of lists of this type did not, of and by itself, 
present any injuries. The minority opinion in that case was that the injury, in the case 
with aprogram such as this made people afraid to use their freedom of speech for 
fear of being sent to jail for it. But majority did not buy that argument.
The difference between that case and this case - although we also have the
computer program - is that we have something much further past that point; the
concentration camp guard program and the Civil Affairs program for the taking over
of all functions of our government. In light of that, the federal judge said that this is
19
146 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
not an injury. As a matter of fact, the U.S. Attorney alleged that even if people were 
placed in concentration camps, if they were all treated the same thay would still not
have the right to go to federal court.
On the 20th day of September, I filed a memorandum to notify the magistrate 
and the federal judge that I had discovered that the federal government had a program 
for number of years to suspend our constitutional right of the writ of habeas corpus. 
This information substantiated the complaint. Habeas corpus is the name of that legal 
instrument utilized to bring someone before a judge when that person is being illegally 
imprisoned or detained so that he (or she) may obtain his (or her) freedom. The 
Constitution slates that the writ of habeas corpus shall never be suspended.
I found the disturbing information in a report: 94-755, 94th Congress, 2nd 
Session Senate, April 26, 1976, entitled "Intelligence Activities and the Rights of 
Americans Book II." On page 17-d, entitled "First Amendment Rights," the report 
states that more importantly "the government surveillance activities in the 
aggregate, whether expressly intended to do so, to deter the exercise of First 
Amendment rights by American citizens who become aware of the government's 
domestic intelligence program."
Beginning on page 54, it is stated that, beginning in 1946 - 4 years before the 
Emergency Detention Act of 1950 was passed - the FBI advised the Attorney General 
that it had secretly compiled a secret index of potentially dangerous persons. The 
Justice Department then made tentative plans for emergency detention based on 
suspension of the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus. Department officials 
deliberately avoided going to Congress. When the Emergency Detention Act of 1950 
was passed, it did not authorize the suspension of the writ of habeas corpus. But 
shortly after passage of that act, according to a bureau document, Attorney General 
J.H. McGraf told the FBI to disregard it and to proceed with the program as previously 
outlined.
A few sentences later, on page 55, it states, "With the security index, use 
broader standards to determine potential dangerousness than those described in the 
statute." And, unlike the act, Department plans provided for issuing a master search 
warrant and a master arrest warrant. This is the center importance; it is the same 
thing that I am alleging in federal court. And yet the magistrate chose to ignore these 
facts also.
We have government officials not only ignoring the will of Congress, but going 
the opposite of what the Constitution provides by planning illegally for the suspension 
of the writ of habeas corpus. In addition, as mentioned before, the master search 
warrant and the master arrest warrant are forms fed into the computer, which print 
the names and addressses on them from the tapes previously prepared bv the 
intelligence-gathering program.
As you are arrested, your home will be searched and anything found there may be 
confiscated. This program has existed since 1946, up to and including 1973, and 
without proper access to judicial discovery techniques, it can't be determined 
dwhether the same plan now exists under the same name or under another name right
20
Chapter Six H.R. 4079 & FEMA • 147
now.
This memorandum was filed on September 28 to make the court aware of the 
danger that our rights of freedom of speech and lawful assembly are in. But the cour, 
on September 30 - after this notification was received - dismissed the case. 
However, in keeping with the practice of federal courts in Houston of actively 
participating in the obstruction of justice, I was not notified of the dismissal until the 
6th of October - which gave me just 2 working days to submit any further motion in a 
10-day period before time starts running for the appeal.
What I have just said regarding the federal courts in Houston is not only my 
opinion; the HOUSTON CHRONICAL, surprisingly, published an extensive document 
severely criticizing the federal courts in Houston for making up their own rules as 
they go along with the proceedings, as well as commenting on the communist-like 
Supreme Court attitude of the judges and the court personnel. My experience here has 
been that the court has returned to me almost every document that I have filed. Then 
after a gib argument, they reaccept the document, stating that they just made a 
mistake. In reality, the power structure doesn't want these types of cases in any 
federal court.
 Summary of Evidence 
On the 8th of October, I had submitted a request for finding the facts in the 
filling which had been established by the evidence presented: 
1. The 300th Military Police POW Command is located at Livonia, Michigan. 
2. The Department of the Army has stated that said Command exists per se the 
Geneva Convention of 1949, a treaty of the U.S., Article IV thereof under the title 
relative to the treatment of prisoners of war and protection of civilian persons.
3. However, no such title exists in the Geneva Convention per se.
4. Nevertheless, there are separate titles, one of which is: (a) Multilateral 
Protection of War Victims/Prisoners of War; (b) Multilateral Protection of War 
Victims/Civilian Persons.
5. Nevertheless, Article IV of both titles does not provide for the creation of any 
military programs for concentration camps.
6. Whether Mr. Fennerin, of the 300th Military Police POW Command, has stated 
that the purpose of the Command is for the detention of foreign prisoners of war and
enemies the United States.
7. Further, Article III, concerning civilian persons, makes the treaty applicable to 
conflicts occurring soley within the territory of the United States that are not of an 
international character, which is capable of including any type of conflict in its 
description whether it be civil war or guerilla activity or anything else. The text
21
148 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
states: "In case of armed conflict not of an international character occurring in the 
territory of one of the high contracting parties, each party to a conflict shall be bound 
to apply to the minimum of the following provisions."
8. Department of the Army Field Manual FM 41-10, Civil Affairs Operations of 
Civil Affairs Organization lists, as one of its functions, the assumption of full or 
partial executive, legislative and judicial authority over a country or an area and 
there is no specific exclusion of the United States as such a country or area. 
9. Said manual defines country along certain geographical population basis, 
county, state regions and national government. 
10. Said organization has, in fact, conducted practed takeovers of local and state 
governments in the continental United States, including, but not limited to the state of 
New Jersey. 
11. Said organization includes in its study outline, on page j-24, a section on 
concentration camps and labor camps. 
12. Said organization includes in its operations composite service operations and 
psychological operations organizations. 
13. Said psychological operation, working with the U.S. Public Health Service, is 
prepared to operate any and/or all mental health facilities in the Unites States as 
tools of repression against outspoken but nonviolent political conduct of the United 
States citizens in conjunction with all the above, which is to be used for the same 
purpose. 
14. Further, the Department of Justice, in conjunction with this program, has had 
plans for the suspension of writ of habeas corpus since the year of 1946; said plan 
depriving persons being detained under this total program any means for protection 
against tyrannical political repression. 
The plaintiff requested that the court make findings of fact and draw 
conclusions of law, consistent therewith, as shown by the evidence on record before 
the court. The effect of this request is that the case must go back to the district judge 
for further consideration. I mentioned that is appeared that all this planning for 
concentration camps was to be directed against anyone, regardless of his polictical 
persuasion of ideology, who exercised freedom of speech against the established 
power structure of international bankers and multinational corporations. But, with 
Proposition 13-type movements threatening to reduce taxes throughout our nation. I 
foresee an activation of emergency programs so that the parasites on the federal take 
will continue to receive their checks.
Price of Patriotism
In the same Senate document, on intelligence activities on the rights of 
Americans referred to on pages 166 and 167, you will find that the federal
22
Chapter Six H.R. 4079 & FEMA • 149
government has targeted its intelligence activities against one group of Americans. On 
page 166, the first classification listed is rightists and anti-communist groups. And 
the first group on page 167 on Army surveillance lists the John Birch Society as a 
number 1 and the Young Americans for Freedom as the number 2 target. Therefore, the 
groups of U.S. American citizens considered to be the biggest enemy of the United 
States, by the federal government, at this time, is the conservative patriot, and those 
who assert the Constitution and individual rights.
Although this information has been available since April of this year (1979), no 
one has mentioned this incredible discovery that the federal government considers the 
patriotic conservative as its greatest enemy. I have received all kinds of information 
regarding this case from all across the United States.
Price of Apathy
I obtained the 1945 report of the O.S.S. (Office of Strategic Service) - the 
precursor of the C.I.A. - 7th Army, William W. Quin, Col. G.F.C.A.C. of the G2, on the 
liberation of Dachau, a concentration camp during the liberation in Germany. It 
contains much groups of information, but the relevant portion of the report concerns 
itself with the section on the townspeople. Quoting from this report, on why the people 
of this little town didn't complain or didn't overthrow oppressors but just continued to 
go along and get along even though they lost their freedom in the process, it states:
These words crop up and up again. They are the rationalization of a man 
who admits that he was a member of the Nazi party. 'I was forced to do 
so by business reasons,' they state. We were lied to in every respect 
but they admit they knew the camp existed. But they saw the work 
detail to the inmates passing through the streets under guard and, in 
some instances, the S.S. behaved brutally even towards the 
townspeople.
When asked if they realized that within the last 3 months before the 
liberation 13,000 men lost their lives within stone's throw of where 
the people lived, they claimed they were shocked and surprised.
When asked if they never saw transports of dead and dying pass through 
the streets along the railway, they referred only to the last one. They 
Insist that most of the trains came in at night and that they were sealed 
cars.
Did they never ask what was in the endless procession of cars that 
came in full and always went out empty? A typical reply was, 'We were 
told it was all army material and booty from France.'
It is established that anyone who stated that he saw only one train come 
In in the daytime was telling a flat lie. There are quite a few such people 
In Dachau.
23
150 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
The analysis of the anti-Nazi element of the town: (1) The people knew what 
was going on in the camp, even ten years prior to liberation; (2) The town did a 
thriving business from the concentration camp guard; (3) Ninety percent are guilty 
and have dabbed themselves with the blood of innocent human beings; (4) The people 
are to blame for their cowardice - they were all too cowardly. They didn't want to 
risk anything. And that was the way it was in all of Germany.
So you can see how the whole program is related here. My lawsuit was against 
one single aspect of the total program: The enforcement arm of the conspiracy - the 
people who make up the cadre that is going to occupy the concentration camps where 
enemies of the United States will be placed. Remember Solzhenitsyn's words in the 
GULAG ARCHIPELAGO: "Resistance should have began right there but it did not begin. 
You aren't gagged, you really can and you really ought to cry out that arrests are 
being made on the strength of false accusations. If many such outcries had been heard 
all over the city would arrests have no longer have been so easy."
They, the tyrants, can't work in the public eye. Those people who were so 
apathetic, hoping that nothing was really wrong, that nothing would happen to their 
persons and property, sat back and watched. The anarchists, financed by multinational 
interests, looted and pillaged their country.
If you think that all (that) is necessary is to pay your house notes, to pay your 
TV notes, to go vote when there is an election, and to stand back during the rest of tht 
year and watch as your country and way of life are replaced by a system in which you 
will be a slave in a concentration camp, you - not the conspirators - are guilty 
because you, by silent acquiescence, invite tyranny and oppression.
And, when you have to steal food to eat because our production is for foreign 
use because the Department of Commerce - through Executive Order 11490 and its 
predecessors - is responsible for international distribution of our commodities, don't 
sit in a culvert hiding and eating and sondering what happened because you made it all 
possible.
When your family is split up and spread across the United States to do slave 
labor and you never see yourloved ones again, it will be your fault because you did 
nothing to prevent it. And, once we loose our freedom, we are never going to regain it. 
That is why we must stand together to prevent the loss of our freedom as citizens of 
the United States.
Thank you very much.
(Conclusion of taped report.)



Chapter 7 Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988 H.R.5210, P.L. 100-690

CHAPTER 7
ANTI-DRUG ABUSE 
ACT of 1988
H.R. 5210 
P.L. 100-690
PREPARATION FOR THE POLICE STATE
AN 
ANALYSIS
152 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
H.R. 5210 / P.L. 100-690
Public Law 100-690, which was introduced to the 100th Congress as 
H.R. 5210, passed by Congress in September 1988 and signed by the President on November 18,1988, is the most serious attack upon the freedoms 
guaranteed the citizens of the Republic of the United States of America in 
our Constitution since the formation of the Federal Reserve and the IRS.
The act may be cited as the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988. The following titles are contained within the act.
Title I Coordination of National Drug Policy
Title II Treatment and Prevention Programs
Title III Drug Education Programs
Title IV International Narcotics Control
Title V User Accountability
Title VI Anti-Drug Abuse Amendments Act of 1988
Title VII Death Penalty and Other Criminal and Law
Enforcement Matters
Title VIII Federal Alcohol Administration
Title IX Miscellaneous
Title X Supplemental Appropriations
The Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988 can be found in most college or city 
libraries contained in the U.S. Code Congressional and Administrative News, 
Vol. 3,1988, with amendment and voting information in the Congressional 
Quarterly Almanac, Vol. XLIV, 1988.
The law looks innocent enough upon first glance, containing new 
drug-awareness and treatment programs, more law enforcement and 
much stricter penalties — and all to be financed with a 2.1-BILLION-dollar 
budget. Upon close examination, however, I discovered some really scary 
stuff tucked in where most citizens would never look.
The act is some 366 pages of fine (very fine) print on very small pages. 
It is tedious reading, as is all legislation. In fact, it was impossible to read 
until Nancy Batchelder, a volunteer on my research staff, enlarged each 
page on a copy machine. Could it be that the Congress does not want the 
citizens to read the contents of their legislation? I believe that is exactly the 
case.
One of the most frightening aspects of this legislation was the proposal to allow evidence found in a warrantless search. Congress said 
"illegally obtained evidence is legal to use in drug cases." Months later the 
Senate said no and that portion of the legislation was removed — or at least
Chapter Seven Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988 • 153
that is what we were meant to think.
The act leaves a loophole for court decisions on some mass searches/ 
drug tests, such as school lockers, requirement for certain jobs, and an 
experimental program for those getting their first driver's license. (Sec. 
9005) Key words here are "mass searches/drug tests," "jobs," and "drivers 
license." The courts have held that if the citizens give up any right by 
giving what is called implied consent, then they no longer have claim to 
that right. The dangerous implication here is that "mass search" could 
mean the search of every person in, say, Chicago, Los Angeles, or New York 
City. Get the picture?
The proposed legislation contained a section that if passed would
have taken away our right to trial by jury, and specifically stated that you
could be held guilty without trial. How could any citizen or Representative or Senator even have had the guts to propose such a thing for passage
into law in this country? Fortunately, it was removed by amendment,
HOWEVER IN SOME CASES A TRIAL ISN'T AUTOMATIC; YOU MUST
REQUEST A HEARING. (Sec. 6480) Do I have your attention yet?
$10,000 is the maximum fine for knowingly possessing any amount of 
a drug of any kind (even the kind that an enemy might plant in your car or 
home) (Sec. 6480).
Congress has asked for a study on the relationship between mental 
illness and substance abuse (Sec. 2071).
Congress has recommended changes for involuntary commitment for 
mental illness which echoes the Russian NKGB model (Sec. 2072a). The 
secret power structure considers PATRIOTISM and NATIONALISM to be 
mental illness.
Congress has asked for an evaluation of the appropriateness of administering health-service programs in conjunction with biomedical and 
behavioral research. IN OTHER WORDS, MIND CONTROL ON A 
GRAND SCALE (Sec. 2073a).
The Congress ordered in this act that "the Attorney General shall 
study the feasibility of prosecuting Federal drug-related offenses in a matter alernative or supplemental to the current criminal justice system." 
THIS IS THE BEGINNING OF A POLICE STATE (Sec. 6293).
The act states that anyone with intent to obstruct or harass the harvesting of timber on public lands can get 1 year in jail or up to 10 years if the
resultant damage exceeds $10,000. Tree spiking is specifically named.
WHAT IS DOING IN A DRUG LAW? It's in there because Congress
wanted to make an end run around environmental groups and give the
timber away (Sec. 6254/1864).
Herbicides are to be used for aerial coca eradication with no considera-
154 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
tion of what it might do to the humans or animals being sprayed. After a 
year of spraying the President shall determine if such use is harmful to 
environment or health and shalL.iile a report (Sec. 4202).
The act mandates the establishment of a ''World Currency Control" 
system. This would be an international data base to analyze currency 
transactions filed by member countries in order to monitor large ($10,000 
or more) dollar transfers. To encourage "teamwork": Prohibit noncooperative foreign countries from participating in any U.S. dollar clearing or 
wire-transfer system, or from maintaining any financial accounts in the 
U.S. (Sec. 4701).
The act gives the Secretary of the Treasury power to require ANY 
transaction records from ANY domestic financial institution (even those 
not part of the bank/savings & loan system), as well as information on ALL 
of the persons involved. MAKE SURE YOU UNDERSTAND WHAT THIS 
MEANS TO YOU PERSONALLY. This IS a police state (Sec. 6184/5326). 
ALERT...ALERT
The Constitution of the United States, Article I, Section 9, paragraph 2, 
states:
"The Privilege of the Writ of Habeas Corpus shall not be suspended, 
unless when in Cases of rebellion or invasion, the Public Safety may 
require it."
Public Law 100-690, Sec. 7323, provides for a Special Committee on 
Habeas Corpus Review of Capital Sentences, appointed by the Chief justice of the United States. The purpose of the Special Committee is to 
recommend to the Chief Justice of the United States, who will forward the 
recommendation to the chairman of the Committee on the Judiciary of the 
Senate, a proposal of a bill to modify Federal habeas corpus procedure.
Quotes from P.L. 100-690:
"This bill to modify habeas corpus procedure must be reported with 
or without recommendation by the Committee on the Judiciary of the 
Senate by the end of the 60th day of session after the submission of the 
report or the bill must be automatically placed on the appropriate calendar 
of the Senate.
"Once the habeas corpus bill is on the calendar, it is not debatable; it is 
not subject to a motion to postpone; reconsideration of the vote by which 
the motion is agreed to or disagreed to shall not be in order under this act. 
Only one motion in the Senate shall be in order pursuant to this paragraph 
and such motion shall be decided by a roll call vote."
Chapter Seven Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988 • 155
 SIT UP AND TAKE NOTICE! 
Section 7323 states that this habeas corpus legislation is enacted by 
Congress "as an exercise of the rulemaking power of the Senate and as such 
it is deemed a part of the rules of the Senate..." 
CAN YOU BELIEVE THIS TREASON? 
Chapter 33 of Title 28, United States Code, is amended by adding at 
the end thereof Sec. 540, which states that the Attorney General and the 
Federal Bureau of Investigation may investigate felonious killings of officials and employees of a State or political subdivision when such investigation is requested by the head of the agency employing the official or 
employee killed, and under such guidelines as the Attorney General or his 
designee may establish.
Notice that the above paragraph does not say by invitation of the 
State, but says by the employing agency. Once the Feds are involved they 
always hold jurisdiction. THIS IS SERIOUS! It could establish the legal 
precedence for justification of a police state once the courts rule that the 
States have given up their right to jurisdiction under this act. Notice that it 
only involves crimes of a POLITICAL nature.
Businesses are required to report all cash transactions of $10,000 or
more (Sec. 7601 /60501-IRS). (It has been reported to me but not verified by
me that this requirement has been lowered to $3000.) THIS HAS NOTHING TO DO WITH DRUGS BUT HAS EVERYTHING TO DO WITH THE
IRS.
The act establishes a requirement to record and verify the I.D. of a 
purchaser of a money order or other financial instrument of $3000 or more 
(Sec. 6184/5325). WHY?
This is a big one. The act orders a study to be made on whether to 
withdraw $100 bills and $50 bills from circulation (Sec. 6187). THIS 
WOULD VIRTUALLY PROPEL US INTO A CASHLESS SOCIETY.
$23 MILLION DOLLARS HAS BEEN ALLOCATED FOR A 
MACHINE-READABLE IDENTITY DOCUMENT PROGRAM. The excuse used is to be able to identify known criminals who attempt to cross
borders. The type of border is not named (required in legislation) and 
could be the border of your city, county or state. It also raises the question 
of how they are going to get the criminals to accept the identity document 
program without REQUIRING ALL CITIZENS TO PARTICIPATE (Sec.
6604.)
This data pool will be shared by: 
Drug Enforcement Administration
156 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, & Firearms
Federal Aviation Commission 
U.S. Marshals Service 
U.S. Coast Guard
The act requires a study of the feasibility of requiring aircraft to carry 
operating transponders so that they can be tracked (Sec. 7212) including 
the "INTERCEPT" (the use of military aircraft is assumed due to the fact 
that the military is the only agency which has such a capability) of any 
aircraft not in a proper flight corridor (Sec. 7213). The act requires a study 
to be made on requiring onboard monitoring devices on commercial motor 
vehicles to record speed, driving time and other information (Sec. 9101). It 
further requires the utilization of existing government laboratory facilities 
(Departments of Defense, Justice, Energy, National Security Agency, CIA, 
FBI) to develop technologies for Federal law enforcement (not limited to) 
drug enforcement) (Sections 6163 and 7605).
This would include:
Night Vision (Ft. Belvoir, Virginia); 
Ground Sensor & Communications Electronics (Ft. Mom 
Jersey);
Physical Electronic Security (Hanscom Field, Massachusetts); 
Imaging Electronic Surveillance (CIA & NSA, Washington, D.C.); 
Chemical/Biosensor Research & Development (Aberdeen, Maryland); 
Chemical /Molecular Research (Albuquerque, New Mexico); 
Physical/Electronic Surveillance & Tracking (FBI, Washington, D.C.) 
Explosives Ordnance Detection (Indian Head, Maryland).
The act calls for the expenditure of $120 million for the Bureau of 
Justice Statistics, a national clearinghouse of data from federal, state, and 
local criminal justice agencies (Sec. 6092).
Grant money will be made available for state and local agencies to 
hook into the data system (Sec. 6101 /1301). Gun sellers will have to check 
for a buyer's police record (Sec 6213).
The act includes a special note from the Attorney General to INCLUDE DOMESTIC VIOLENCE information in the system (Sec. 7609).
My sources have informed me that the New World Order plans to 
execute any person who has exhibited any degree of violence during their 
life. A fist fight while in the service would qualify you. They believe that
Chapter Seven Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988 • 157
violence is hereditary and this could mean execution of family members as 
well.
This act calls for a study of the feasibility of establishing an INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (World Court) (Sec. 4108).
An international criminal court would have no jurisdiction or authority over any citizen of the United States of America unless we surrender 
our sovereignty to the New World Order.
No weapons are to be allowed in Federal buildings: up to 1 year 
imprisonment for carrying a weapon into any FEDERAL FACILITY. The 
only exception is a pocket knife, but only if the blade is LESS than 2-1/2 
inches long (Sec. 6215).
 The act has authorized postal authorities to serve warrants, subpoenas, make arrests, carry firearms, and make seizures in matters involving 
use of mails (Sec. 6251). 
The Post Office Department is a private corporation and is not a part 
of the Federal government. How can they be allowed to function as Federal police if they are not federalized? Are post office employees destined to 
become a part of the national police force? 
It is now illegal to mail or send locksmithing equipment to anyone but 
a locksmith (Sec. 3002). MANY COMMON TOOLS CAN BE CLASSIFIED 
AS LOCKSMITHING EQUIPMENT. 
The act legalizes the arming of aircraft in other countries for defensive 
purposes, in drug control (Sec. 4202). 
SAY AGAIN? If this had been in existence a few years ago, the IRANCONTRA AFFAIR WOULD HAVE BEEN LEGAL with only a statement 
that the arms were for defensive purposes in drug control. 
The act mandates that military installations are to be used as MENTAL 
TREATMENT CENTERS, OR PRISON CAMPS WITH WORK PROGRAMS (Sections 7302 and 2081/561). Does this SOUND LIKE RUSSIA? 
In addition, $200 million dollars will go for new prisons (Sec. 6157). 
Plus, proceeds from seized and forfeited property are to be used for 
construction of prisons, rewards for information or help, or for OTHER 
THINGS THE ATTORNEY GENERAL NEED NOT REPORT (Sec. 6072/ 
924 Title 20-CIA,H). 
The act states that prison industries may BORROW AND INVEST 
FUNDS (Sec. 7093). Prison industries may DIVERSIFY THEIR PRODUCTS and PRODUCE PRODUCTS ON AN ECONOMIC BASIS (Sec. 
1096b provide a labor pool SOVIET UNION STYLE it authorizes a 
study of the feasibility of REQUIRING PRISONERS TO PAY THEIR COSTS 
FOR FOOD, HOUSING AND SHELTER AT PAID EMPLOYMENT 
BEFORE, DURING OR AFTER IMPRISONMENT (Sec. 7301).
158 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
In other words, it means imprisonment Soviet style presented in what 
sounds like a nice idea. A LABOR CAMP WHERE MEN AND WOMEN 
ARE WORKED TO DEATH IS ONLY THAT AND NOTHING MORE OR 
LESS, NO MATTER WHAT THEY CALL IT OR HOW ATTRACTIVE 
THEY MAKE IT SOUND.
Prisons going into business to produce products on an economic basis 
can only serve to DESTROY THE LAST REMNANTS OF SMALL BUSINESS.
This law is 366 pages of very small print I am sure that as carefully as I read 
it, I still must have missed many other terrible clauses. Congressmen have 
been known to deny knowledge of this law and some have stated that it does 
not exist because they are terrified of the public finding out what they have 
done. When I first warned the nation about this legislation on talk radio 
across the country, the Government pulled all copies not already in public 
hands. The Government states that there are no copies available and there 
will not be any copies available. THIS ACT IS TOO LARGE TO INCLUDE IN 
THIS BOOK. You will find it in your library, though, exactly as I have stated 
at the beginning of this chapter. Please look it up yourself to verify that it it 
indeed real.
SOURCES
Public Law 100-690.
U.S. Code Congressional and Administrative News, Vol. 3,1988, with amendment and voting information in the Congressional Quarterly Almanac Vol. 
XLIV, 1988.



Chapter 8 Are the Sheep Ready to Shear?

CHAPTER 8
ARE THE SHEEP 
READY TO SHEAR?
OKLAHOMA 
H.B. 1750
TEST CASE 
FOR THE POLICE STATE
160 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
OKLAHOMA
H.B. 1750
The Police State's Test Case
Gary North recently wrote about one of the scariest pieces of socialistic
police-state legislation to arrive on the scene to date.
"On January 1, 1991, a new, 96-page state law goes into effect: H.B. 
1750, passed last year [1989]." It requires all Oklahoma residents to declare 
everything they own to the tax collector, everything: guns, coins, art collections, furniture, business equipment, bank accounts, household furniture, 
etc. Forms will be distributed through banks. Any taxpayer who refuses to 
fill out the form and submit it to the tax assessor by March 15 — the ides of 
March — will be visited by an assessor. He will ask permission to enter the 
home or place of business. If this request is denied, he will be issued a 
search warrant. Any property not previously listed, or undervalued, will 
be assessed a penalty of up to 20% of its market value. This will make 
renters into property taxpayers and make life easy for the gun grabbers.
What are the investment implications of this? Invest in a good gun 
and be standing on your porch with gun in hand when they pay you a visit.
It is clear where the tax collectors are headed next. Oklahoma will be a 
test case. If they can pull this one off, the other states will follow. Big 
Brother wants to know all and to tax all. Eventually the New World Order 
will eliminate all private property, "redistribute the wealth," and this inventory will tell them how much exists and exactly where it is stored. Of 
course, the Oklahoma tax assessor will share its information with other 
federal and state agencies.
Will they get away with this blatant disregard for civil and constitutional rights? That is exactly the reason for the law, to find out if it will meet 
with strong or violent opposition. If the citizens of Oklahoma lie down and 
allow this to happen, then you can bet everyone else in the nation is going 
to be subjected to the same or a similar law.
It is time to stand up with a weapon and scream, "ENOUGH!" It is 
time to draw the line. It is time to make decisions and carry them out. It is 
time to resist at any and all cost. The penalty for failing to do so is slavery.
IT IS NOT TIME FOR REBELLION. IT IS TIME FOR RESTORATION.
THE CONSTITUTION MUST BE AGAIN, AS IT ONCE WAS, THE 
SUPREME LAW OF THE LAND. FEDERALISM IS TREASON. STAND 
UP AND FIGHT.
Chapter Eight Are the Sheep Ready to Shear? • 161
SOURCES
H.B 1750, legislation of the Oklahoma State House of Representatives, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, 1989.
North, Gary, "Big Brother Wants to See It All in Oklahoma," The McAlvany 
Intelligence Advisor, July 1990.



Chapter 9 Anatomy of an Alliance

CHAPTER 9
ANATOMY OF AN 
ALLIANCE
The Logic for the New World Order
The Glue That Binds the Alliance of Power
and 
the Consequences
All that is necessary for evil to triumph 
is for good men to do nothing.
Edmund Burke, 1729-1797
164 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
THE REASONS FOR COOPERATION BETWEEN 
OPPOSING FORCES
I give lectures all over the United States. At some point before, during, 
or after every lecture, some well-meaning but misguided soul, tells me that 
I have it all wrong and that it's the Jews, the Catholics, the communists, or 
the bankers that are the cause of all our ills. The target group is blamed for 
everything that has ever gone wrong. Power over everyone and everything is always attributed to this group — whichever group it happens to 
be at that moment to that person. These poor people are on the right track, 
in that there has been and certainly is a conspiracy to bring about a totalitarian world order. They are completely off track to think that any one 
ethnic, religious, or financial group alone could ever muster enough power 
to bring its plan to fruition. One group, you see, would always be opposed 
by all of the other special-interest groups that exist and have always existed 
throughout history. That is, unless they were all really the same group (the 
Illuminati) or for some reason they became unified (the Bilderberg Group).
The one-group scenario, except for the Illuminati, has been used effectively to divert your attention away from the truth. It has caused you to 
fight each other in a manipulation that always leads the REAL conspiracy 
closer to its ultimate goal, a New World Order. Those of you who believe 
that Hitler was financed by Jews so that he could murder Jews have a 
serious logic deficit. The fanatical leftists who tout that it's Nazis behind 
the conspiracy have ignored the fact that very wealthy Jews are certainly 
involved, along with many Catholics, Protestants, communists, atheists, 
capitalists, Freemasons, etc., all of whom are diametrically opposed to each 
other, at least on the surface.
Those on the right who believe that it is communist forget that U.S. 
bankers financed the creation of the Soviet Union. Financial assistance 
from MANY different countries, institutions, and peoples of opposing 
religious and political beliefs has been the only thing that has kept the 
unworkable communist economy afloat for all of these years. The Rockefeller family has a bank branch in the Kremlin. Those on the right must 
also ask why, whenever we have set out to stop communism, the United 
States has only strengthened communism. No modern war, no matter 
what it was called, has ever resulted in territorial gain for the winner. It is 
not because our leaders are communist, as claimed by the right. Communism was a creation meant to function as the antithesis to the United 
States. Many of our leaders, however, are Illuminati.
The answer lies with the many faces of the Illuminati and the fact that 
several unifying reasons for bringing about the New World Order surfaced
Chapter Nine Anatomy of an Alliance • 165
immediately following World War II. It is possible, however, that one or 
two or more of these reasons are not real, and thus manipulations. The 
evidence indicates that they are real and dangerous, each in its own way, 
and must be dealt with quickly and thoroughly.
If it were secretly discovered that extraterrestrial beings were visiting
the earth it certainly would make sense to unite humanity against the
possible threat that this would present. If extraterrestrials are not visiting
earth, then it would make sense to invent them in order to convince
opposing forces to unite against the threat. This has been done whether or
not the alien beings in question exist; however, there are more believable
and more immediate dangers that may be the reason for an alliance of so
many traditionally opposing groups. Aliens will be discussed at length in
a later chapter.
The reason could be the threatened extinction of the human race by no 
other enemy than the human race itself. This threat may not be a manipulation; it may be real, and unless drastic measures are taken, may materialize within the next one hundred years.
Following World War II something happened that was to have tremendous significance for the future of all mankind. The intellectuals took
note of this happening and brought it to the attention of the world power
elite The elite were severely shaken by the predicted repercussions of this
event. They were told that by or shortly after the year 2000 the total
collapse of civilization as we know it and the possible extinction of the
human race could occur. It could occur, that is, if we did not destroy the
earth with nuclear weapons before then. They were told that the only
things that could stop these predicted events would be severe cutbacks of
the human population, the cessation or retardation of technological and
economic growth, the elimination of meat in the human diet, strict control
of future human reproduction, a total commitment to preserving the environment, colonization of space, and a paradigm shift in the evolutionary
consciousness of man.
Those in power immediately formed an alliance and set about bring-
 ing the recommended changes to fruition through propaganda, mind control and other manipulations of the masses. The Illuminati's prayers had 
been answered. 
What was this event that caused so much consternation and changed 
forever the future of the world? Millions of soldiers returned from war. 
The soldiers found lonely, eager women waiting for them. The greatest 
coupling in the history of the human race occurred. The result was everyone born between 1941 and 1955 and the children that they would eventually produce. It was me and you and everyone who lives today. It was
166 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
the great worldwide BABY BOOM. It was the culmination of all man's 
efforts to survive through history. It was modern medicine, better diets, 
heat in winter, pure running water, and proper disposal of sewage. It was 
the point in history when the birth rate so exceeded the death rate that the 
world's population doubled between 1957 and 1990. It was the most 
wonderful time in the history of the world, but it was also the worst. It 
signaled the end of man's most precious achievement. An alliance of all of 
the powers on earth, open and hidden, decided that individual freedoms 
could no longer be tolerated in the interest of the preservation of the human 
race. They believed the common man could not be trusted.
What had been the unfulfilled dream of many individual groups 
became reality by the concentration of power in the alliance known as the 
Bilderberg Group. What had been impossible before was now promised 
The New World Order that so many had envisioned was now a certainty.
The first study was made during World War II to determine the impact 
of the returning soldiers upon the economy. The results mobilized the 
ruling elite. A second secret study was conducted in 1957 by scientists 
meeting in Huntsville, Alabama. It confirmed the results of the first. The 
conclusion was that civilization as we know it would collapse shortly after 
the year 2000 unless the population was seriously curtailed. The study 
expressed a concern that since atomic weapons existed they would ultimately be used. Total worldwide disarmament was urged. Congress 
adopted the disarmament plan and created the U.S. Disarmament Agency, 
President Dwight David Eisenhower had this to say in 1957: "As a result of 
lowered infant mortality, longer lives, and the accelerating conquest of 
famine there is under way a population explosion so incredibly great that 
in little more than another generation the population of the world is expected to double."
A third study was made by the Club of Rome ending in 1968 to 
determine the limits to growth. The result was the same. The Club of 
Rome was commissioned to develop a computer model of the world so as 
to predict the outcome of corrections made to social and economic structures by the elect. The Club of Rome was also asked to develop a computer 
model of a New World Order. Both tasks were accomplished.
Studies were done to determine a method to arrest the population 
explosion before the point of no return would be reached. It was determined that an immediate attack on the problem would involve two points 
of intervention. The first was to lower the birth rate and the second was to 
increase the death rate.
To lower the birth rate several programs were put into motion. The 
first was the development of positive birth-control methods using
ChapterNine Anatomy of an Alliance • 167
mechanical (diaphragm and condom), chemical (foam and birth-control
pills), and medical (sterilization, abortion, and hysterectomy) procedures.
These were developed and implemented. The Women's Liberation movement was started with the demand for free abortions, using "pro choice" as
its rallying cry. Homosexuality was encouraged and Gay Liberation was
born. Homosexuals do not have children. Zero population growth became
a hot subject at cocktail parties. Individual freedom, "the heat of the
moment," religion, and the old blue laws sabotaged these efforts, and while
zero population growth became a reality in some areas, population increased rapidly in others.
The only alternative left to the world's ruling elite was to increase the 
death rate. This was a difficult thing to do, as no one wanted to pick people 
out of a crowd and line them up for execution. Neither did they relish the 
possible consequences of an enraged public upon discovering that they 
were being systematically murdered. Of course, a very short but very 
deadly global war using nuclear weapons upon select population concentrations was contemplated and, to tell you the truth, was not ruled out. 
The fact that such a population control was even contemplated confirmed 
the worst fears of those who had participated in the 1957 study. War was 
put on the back burner to simmer, but may become a reality. In the 
meantime something else had to be done that would absolve the decision 
makers of guilt and place the blame on those who did not lead clean lives.
 Something that could be blamed upon Mother Nature. What was needed 
was the bubonic plague or some other horrible but natural disease. The 
answer came from Rome. 
Several Top Secret recommendations were made by Dr. Aurelio Peccei 
of the Club of Rome. He advocated that a plague be introduced that would 
havhe same effect as the famous Black Death of history. The chief 
recommendation was to develop a microbe which would attack the autoimmune system and thus render the development of a vaccine impossible. 
The orders were given to develop the microbe and to develop a prophylactic and a cure. The microbe would be used against the general population 
and would be introduced by vaccine. The prophylactic was to be used by 
the rulling elite. The cure will be administered to the survivors when it is 
decided that enough people have died. The cure will be announced as 
newly developed when in fact it has existed from the beginning. This plan 
is a part of Global 2000. The prophylactic and the cure are suppressed. 
"Man has skyrocketed from a defensive position, largely subordinated 
to Nature's alternatives, to a new and dominant one. From it he not only 
can and does influence everything in the world but, voluntarily or unwittingly, can and indeed does determine the alternatives of his own future —
168 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
and ultimately must choose his options for it. In other words, his novel 
power condition practically compels him to take up new regulatory functions that willy-nilly he has had to discharge with respect to the world's 
mixed natural-human systems. Having penetrated a number of the erstwhile mysteries and being able to sway events massively, he is now vested 
with unprecedented, tremendous responsibilities and thrown into the new 
role of moderator of life on the planet — including his own." The above 
words were written by Dr. Aurelio Peccei and are taken verbatim from 
page 607 of The Global 2000 Report to the President.
Funding was obtained from the U.S. Congress under H.B. 15090 
(1969), where $10 million was given to the DOD's 1970 budget. Testimony 
before the Senate Committee revealed that they intended to produce "a 
synthetic biological agent, an agent that does not naturally exist and for 
which no natural immunity could have been acquired. Within the next 5 to 
10 years it would probably be possible to make a new infective microorganism which could differ in certain important aspects from any known 
disease-causing organisms. Most important of these is that it might be 
refractory to the immunological and therapeutic processes upon which we 
depend to maintain our relative freedom from infectious disease."
Sir Julian Huxley said, "Overpopulation is, in my opinion, the most 
serious threat to the whole future of our species." The project, called 
MK-NAOMI, was carried out at Fort Detrick, Maryland.
Since large populations were to be decimated, the ruling elite decided 
to target the "undesirable" elements of society. Specifically targeted were 
the black, Hispanic, and homosexual populations. The poor homosexuals 
were encouraged on the one hand and scheduled for extinction on the 
other.
The African continent was infected via smallpox vaccine in 1977. The 
vaccine was administered by the World Health Organization. According to 
Dr. Robert Strecker, "Without a cure the entire black population of Africa 
will be dead within 15 years. Some countries are well beyond epidemic 
status."
The U.S. population was infected in 1978 with the hepatitis B vaccine. 
Dr. Wolf Szmuness, the ex-roommate of Pope John Paul II, was the mastermind behind the November/78 to October/79 and March/80 to October/81 experimental hepatitis B vaccine trials conducted by the Centers for 
Disease Control in New York, San Francisco and four other American cities. 
He loosed the plague of AIDS upon the American people. The gay population was infected. The ads for participants specifically asked for promiscuous homosexual male volunteers. Whatever causes AIDS was in the 
vaccine. The vaccine was manufactured and bottled in Phoenix, Arizona.
Chapter Nine Anatomy of an Alliance • 169
The order was given by the POLICY COMMITTEE of THE BILDERBERG GROUP based in Switzerland. Other measures were also ordered.
The one you will be able to check the easiest is the Haig-Kissinger 
Depopulation Policy, which is administered by the State Department. This 
policy dictates that Third World nations take positive and effective steps to 
decrease their populations and hold them in check or they get no aid from 
the United States. If the Third World nations refuse, civil war usually 
breaks out and the rebels are usually found to be trained, armed, and 
financed by the Central Intelligence Agency. That is why many more 
civilians (especially young fertile females) than soldiers have been killed in 
El Salvador, Nicaragua, and other places. These wars have been instigated 
in Catholic countries by Jesuits (see Chapter 2).
The Haig-Kissinger depopulation policy has taken over various levels
of government and is in fact determining U.S. foreign policy. The planning
organization operates outside the White House and directs its entire efforts
to reduce the world's population by 2 billion people through war, famine,
disease, and any other means necessary. This group is the National Security Council's Ad Hoc Group on Population Policy. The policy planning
staff is in the State Department's Office of Population Affairs, established in
1975 by Henry Kissinger. This same group drafted the Global 2000 Report
to the President that was given to Carter.
Thomas Ferguson, the Latin American case officer for the State 
Department's Office of Population Affairs (OPA) made the following statements: "There is a single theme behind all our work; we must reduce 
population levels. Either they do it our way, through nice clean methods or 
they will get the kind of mess that we have in El Salvador, or in Iran, or in 
Beirut. Population is a political problem. Once population is out of control 
it requires authoritarian government, even fascism, to reduce it....The 
professionals," stated Ferguson, "aren't interested in lowering population 
for humanitarian reasons. That sounds nice. We look at resources and 
environmental constraints. We look at our strategic needs, and we say that 
this country must lower its population, or else we will have trouble. So 
steps are taken. El Salvador is an example where our failure to lower 
population by simple means has created the basis for a national security 
crisis. The government of El Salvador failed to use our programs to lower 
their population. Now they get a civil war because of it. There will be 
dislocation and food shortages. They still have too many people there. 
Civil wars are somewhat drawn-out ways to reduce population. The 
quickest way to reduce population is through famine, like in Africa or 
through DISEASE, like the Black Death, all of which MIGHT OCCUR in El 
Salvador." His budget for FY 1980 was $190 million; for FY 1981 it was
170 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
$220 million. The Global 2000 Report calls for doubling that figure.
Henry Kissinger created this group after discussion with leaders of the 
Club of Rome during the 1974 population conferences in Bucharest and 
Rome. The Club of Rome is controlled by Europe's Black Nobility. 
Alexander Haig is a firm believer in population control. It was Haig that 
backed Kissinger and pushed the OPA into action.
Ferguson said, "We will go into a country and say, here is your goddamn development plan. Throw it out the window. Start looking at the 
size of your population and figure out what must be done to reduce it. If 
you don't like that, if you don't want to choose to do it through planning, 
then you'll have an El Salvador or an Iran, or worse, a Cambodia."
The real reason the Shah of Iran was overthrown was that his best 
efforts to institute "clean programs" of birth control failed to make a 
significant dent in the country's birth rate. The promise of jobs, through an 
ambitious industrialization program, encouraged migration toward overcrowded cities like Teheran. Under Ayatollah Khomeini, the clean programs have been dismantled. The government may make progress because 
it has a program "to induce up to half of Teheran's 6 million residents to 
relocate. Iran's war with Iraq really pleased the OPA." Now you know 
about the Shah and now you know part of the reason we have troops in the 
Middle East. Marcos fell victim to the same policy.
Daniel B. Luten had this to say: "...an organization cannot have a 
conservation policy without having a population policy....the sanity test — 
in which the candidate, confronted with an overflowing sink, is classified 
according to whether he reaches for the mop or the faucet."
Thousands of people, mostly civilians, are killed in El Salvador's civil 
war each year. "To accomplish what the State Department deems adequate 
'population control,' the civil war would have to be greatly expanded," 
according to Thomas Ferguson, the Latin American case officer for the 
OPA.
El Salvador was targeted for population control and war in an April 
1980 population report published by the National Security Council. "El 
Salvador is an example of a country with serious population and political 
problems," the report states. "Rapid population growth — the birth rate 
has remained unchanged in recent years — aggravates its population density, which is already the highest on mainland Latin America. While a 
population program exists on paper, it has not been pursued with a strong 
commitment, and contraceptives remain unavailable." The population 
program "really did not work," OPA's Ferguson said. 'The infrastrucure 
was not there to support it. There were just too many goddamn people. If 
you want to control a country, you have to keep the population down. Too
Chapter Nine Anatomy of an Alliance • 171
many people breed social unrest and communism."
"Something had to be done," the OPA official said. The birth rate is 3.3 
percent — one of the highest in the world. Its population, he complained, 
will double in 21 years. "The civil war can help things, but it would have to 
be greatly expanded."
In making sure that the population falls in El Salvador, Ferguson said,
the OPA has learned a lot from its experiences in Vietnam. "We studied the
thing. That area was also overpopulated and a problem. We thought that
the war would lower population and we were wrong." Now you know
what we were really doing in Vietnam and why we were not allowed to
win According to Ferguson, the population in Vietnam increased during
the war, despite U.S. use of defoliation and a combat strategy that encouraged civilian casualties. Now you know why those of us in the know
consider Lt. Calley to be a scapegoat.
To reduce population "quickly," said Ferguson "you have to pull all
the males into the fighting and kill significant numbers of fertile, childbearing age females." He criticized the current civil war in El Salvador:
"You are killing a small number of males and not enough fertile females to
do the job on the population. If the war went on 30 to 40 years like this,
then you might accomplish something. Unfortunately, we don't have too
many instances like that to study."
To aid you in your research of this travesty, the names of the significant
reports are THE POPULATION BOMB by DR. PAUL R. EHRLICH (his wife
Anne is a member of the Club of Rome), THE GLOBAL 2000 REPORT TO
THE PRESIDENT, and THE LIMITS TO GROWTH, A REPORT FOR THE
CLUB OF ROME'S PROJECT ON THE PREDICAMENT OF MANKIND.
In April 1968 the study began publicly in the Academia dei Lincei in
Rome, Italy. The study had been ongoing in secret ever since the initial
findings of the Huntsville meeting of 1957. They met at the instigation of
Dr. Aurelio Peccei. The first real public indication of their findings and the
solution that had been decided upon was publication of the book The
Population Bomb in May 1968. Notice how close the dates are. On page 17
of The Population Bomb, a telling paragraph reveals all there is to know.
"In summary, the world's population will continue to grow as long as
the birth rate exceeds the death rate; it's as simple as that. When it stops
growing or starts to shrink, it will mean that either the birth rate has gone
down the death rate has gone up or a combination of the two. Basically,
then, there are only two kinds of solutions to the population problem. One
is a 'birth rate solution,' in which we find ways to lower the birth rate. The
other is a 'death rate solution,' in which ways to raise the death rate — war,
famine, pestilence — find us. The problem could have been avoided by
172 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
population control, in which mankind consciously adjusted the birth 
rate so that a 'death rate solution' did not have to occur."
The recommendations of the results of the study were made by Dr. 
Aurelio Peccei, who pledged not to use the prophylactic and not to take the 
cure should the microbe be developed and should he contract the disease. 
Dr. Peccei was considered a hero for deciding to take the same risk as the 
general population. The public results of the study were published in 1968 
and again in 1972. The MIT project team members that developed the 
computer model study are listed below:
Dr. Dennis L. Meadows, director, United States
Dr. Alison A. Anderson, United States (pollution)
Dr. Jay M. Anderson, United States (pollution)
Ilyas Bayar, Turkey (agriculture)
William W. Behrens III, United States (resources)
Farhad Hakimzadeh, Iran (population)
Dr. Steffen Harbordt, Germany (sociopolitical trends)
Judith A. Machen, United States (administration)
Dr. Donella H. Meadows, United States (population)
Peter Milling, Germany (capital)
Nirmala S. Murthy, India (population)
Roger F. Naill, United States (resources)
Jorgen Randers, Norway (population)
Stephen Shantzis, United States (agriculture)
John A. Seeger, United States (administration)
Marilyn Williams, United States (documentation)
Dr. Erich K. O. Zahn, Germany (agriculture)
When the study was completed in 1969 U.N. Secretary General U 
Thant of the United Nations made this statement:
"I do not wish to seem overdramatic, but I can only conclude from the 
information that is available to me as Secretary General, that the Members 
of the United Nations have perhaps ten years left in which to subordinate 
their ancient quarrels and launch a global partnership to curb the arms 
race, to defuse the population explosion, and to supply the required 
momentum to development efforts. If such a global partnership is not 
forged within the next decade, then I very much fear that the problems I 
have mentioned will have reached such staggering proportions that they 
will be beyond our capacity to control."
MK-NAOMI was developed by the Special Operations Division 
(SOD) scientists at Ft. Detrick, Maryland under the supervision of the CIA.
Chapter Nine Anatomy of an Alliance • 173
A reference to the project MK-NAOMI can be found in The Intelligence 
Community by Fain et al., Bowker, 1977.
Lt. Col. James "Bo" Gritz was a member of the Special Operations 
Division of the Department of Defense, the commander of U.S. Special 
Forces in Latin America, the principle agent for the National Security 
Council's supersecret Intelligence Support Activity (ISA), which hatched 
the illegal groups known as Yellow Fruit and Seaspray, and the Congressional Relations Chief for the Pentagon. Lt. Col. Gritz claims he didn't 
know of any illegalities in the military or in government until he was told 
by a drug lord in a Third World nation. I'm sorry, but I am not that easily 
duped. I recommend that we support his efforts as long as his efforts help 
us, I also recommend that we watch him very carefully. There is a slim 
chance that Gritz is legitimate, but I would not put my life in his hands.
Lowell Sumner expressed his view: "As a biologist the human population explosion, and its declining spiral of natural resources, is to me the
 greatest threat of all. The time is ripe, even dangerously overripe, as far as 
the population control problem is concerned. We shall have to face up or 
ultimately perish, and what a dreary, stupid, unlovely way to perish, on a 
ruined globe stripped of its primeval beauty." 
Many other population controls have been promulgated. The reduction of the world's population to workable levels has been virtually assured. It is only a matter of time. The problem will be to curtail further 
human reproduction beyond approved levels. To handle that problem the 
New World Order will adopt the Communist Chinese model of population 
control. It is the only population-control program that has ever worked. 
The old and infirm have been periodically murdered and couples are 
forbidden to have more than one child. Penalties are so severe that families 
in China with two children are extremely rare. Three-children families are 
nonexistent. A surprising byproduct is that Chinese children as a group are 
treated better than any other national grouping of children in the world, 
including the United States.
Tobacco fields in the U.S. have been fertilized with the radioactive
haillings from uranium mines, resulting in a tremendous increase in the
incidence of lip, mouth, throat, and lung cancer. If you do not believe it,
just look at the incidence of lung cancer per capita before 1950 and compare
it to the lung cancer per capita at the present time. Are those who smoke
committing suicide, or are they being murdered?
Malathion, a nerve gas developed by the Nazis during World War II to 
kill people, is being sprayed heavily on population centers in California.
 The excuse used is that it will kill the Mediterranean fruit fly. The tipoff is 
that the orchards are not being sprayed, only people. The helicopters come
174 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
from Evergreen in Arizona, a known government and a suspected CIA 
base. The pilots are contract pilots furnished by Evergreen. Evergreen has 
been named as one of the bases where drugs are flown in from Central 
America. The City of Pasadena passed a law making it illegal to spray 
malathion within the city limits. The law was ignored and the city took no 
action. When the people of California literally revolted against the spraying of malathion, the Governor of California stated that he did not have the 
power to stop the operation. What higher power is there that could 
prevent a governor of a state from halting the spraying of an insecticide? A 
warning was issued to cover up automobiles and belongings because 
malathion could destroy paint, some plastics, and other property. People, 
they said, would not be injured. It is a lie.
Heart disease used to be a very rare illness. Now it is epidemic. Go 
and look at the statistics. I do not know what is causing this, but 80 years 
ago people consumed more salt, fat, cholesterol, and everything else that 
heart disease is blamed upon, but the disease was rare. Why is it now one 
of the leading killers?
In the state of Colorado and elsewhere dioxin is turning up in the 
drinking water in alarming levels. It should not be present in any amount. 
Where is it coming from? Dioxin is one of the deadliest chemicals known 
to man. Colorado citizens attempting to do battle against the dioxin contamination are met with closed doors, denial, and attacks upon their characters.
We have watched the news in horror as story after story unfolded 
revealing that the Army and the CIA had released germs and viruses into 
the population to test their biological warfare capability. In light of what 
you have learned in this chapter you should now know that it was really to 
reduce population.
It is a matter of public record that investigations into cover-ups of 
radioactive leaks into the atmosphere and into ground water have revealed 
that some leaks were not accidental but were purposful. Some areas of the 
country now have such a high rate of cancer that virtually everyone who 
lives in these areas will die other than a natural death. The true extent of 
radioactive gases, waste, and toxic material, especially cesium-137, strontium-90, uranium-mine and -mill tailings, thorium-230, radium-226, and 
radon-222 that has leaked or has been purposely planted in the atmosphere, soil, and ground water is far beyond anything you or I can imagine. 
Every investigation has revealed that the true figures regarding radioactive 
leakage are much larger than official figures and the real numbers may 
never be known. Cover-up has become SOP (standard operating procedure) at all levels and in all departments of government. Do we dream
Chapter Nine Anatomy of an Alliance • 175
reality or is reality a dream?
According to Dr. Eva Snead, the San Francisco Bay area has one of the 
highest cancer rates in the world. The San Francisco Bay area has been 
revealed as one of the primary test locations of the Central Intelligence 
Agency's biological and chemical programs. You may recall that Legionnaire's disease was an experimental bacteria released into the wind on the 
San Francisco Bay from a government-operated boat. San Francisco is also 
one of the six known inoculation sites for the CIA Project MK-NAOMI 
(AIDS). The Bay area was headquarters for Dr. Timothy Leary, who introduced the drug culture to American youth under CIA Project MK-ULTRA. 
It is suspected that the San Francisco Bay area was also subjected to 
large doses of radiation to test the effects upon a population over a prolonged period of time. Why do they hate San Francisco? The answer is 
that the largest homosexual population in America lives in San Francisco 
and they have been targeted for extermination.
A reason for the New World Order, or rationalization, as the case may 
be, is the very real possibility that some terrorist will set off a global nuclear 
war by detonating an atomic bomb to make a political point. I believe that 
it is safe to say that any large-scale exchange of atomic or hydrogen 
weapons will result in the complete destruction of civilization, and could 
precipitate the escalation of the onslaught of an ice age. The obvious 
conclusion would be that any kind of compromise leading to coexistence is 
better han any kind of nuclear exchange. In other words, "better Red than 
dead." This is exactly what the hierarchy has decided, only the New World 
Order will not be Red. It will be fascist. It will, in fact, be a socialist 
totalitarian state.
It is hoped that a natural metamorphosis will eventually occur. The 
Illuminati hope that it will result in a paradigm shift of the evolutionary 
consciousness of man. This could cause the formation of a state where no 
government is needed, where anarchy is not to be feared. They dream that 
the end result will be the world that Christ taught but that the Christian 
religion prevents. It is ironic that the Illuminati actually believe that this 
can evolve from a plan built upon such suffering. Christ suffered, if the 
New Testament is true, to bring about his world; and if he suffered maybe 
it is necessary that we also suffer. I am not wise enough to know the
answer.
I managed to locate a reference to The Protocols of Sion dated in the
1700s (see Chapter 15, page 269). This plan for subjugation of the world
correctly outlined exactly what has happened since the Protocols were
discovered, and that is all that is needed to confirm the authenticity of the
information contained within the document. It is clear that the Illuminati
176 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
has planned to rule the world for centuries.
They have followed the plan outlined in The Protocols of Sion. The 
Illuminati could not possibly have succeeded, however, if an alliance had 
not been formed with the other world power structures. Is the world 
population crisis a hoax perpetrated to bring that alliance about? It it 
possible. All I can say is that my own calculations, using the knowledge 
available to me, performed on my 386 computer, confirm that the crisis it 
real, and is, in fact, very serious. If it is a manipulation, the whole world 
has been fooled.
ALL INTELLECTUALS, RULERS, AND GOVERNING BODIES 
AGREE THAT POPULATION IS THE BIGGEST THREAT TO CIVILIZATION THAT WE KNOW OF TODAY. It does not matter what you believe. 
If THEY believe it, you will be affected because they have the power.
The New World Order will eliminate the population threat in several 
ways. Complete control of individual behavior may be established using 
electronic or chemical implants. No one will be allowed to have a child 
without permission; stiff penalties wait for those who ignore the law. The 
violent, the old, the infirm, the handicapped, and the unproductive will be 
killed. Private property will be abolished. Since religion helped to create 
the population problem, it will not be tolerated except for the approved 
state-controlled religion which will evolve according to man's needs. 
Joseph Campbell explains this concept excellently in his series with Bill 
Movers called "The Power of Myth." Cash will disappear and with it most 
crime will also disappear; but total control of each individual will be the 
price we pay.
Man cannot be trusted to safeguard what little is left in the way of 
natural resources. Technological development and economic growth will 
be severely cut back. Man will be required to live like his ancestors. Those 
who learn to be self-sufficient and can adapt to the absence of many of the 
things that we take for granted today, such as automobiles, will get along 
fine. Others will suffer terribly. Man will once again conform to the law of 
the survival of the fittest.
No one is going to like the loss of individual freedoms guaranteed us 
by the Constitution and the Bill of Rights. I do not like or agree with what is 
planned. Intellectually I know that people will not solve the problems that 
we face unless they are made to do it. That is a sad commentary on the 
common man, but nevertheless it is true. The New World Order is evil but 
very much needed if man is to survive long enough to plant his seed 
amongst the stars. A paradigm shift and starseed are the only legitimate 
long-term answers.
THIS IS WHY WE HAVE ALL BEEN SO WRONG FOR SO LONG. It
Chapter Nine Anatomy of an Alliance • 177
never was what we thought it was. Nothing is or ever will be until we 
learn to live in reality instead of fantasyland. A paradigm shift in the 
evolutionary consciousness of man MUST take place. Right or wrong, the 
world is covered with agents of the Illuminati who are attempting to cause 
that evolutionary jump. We have not been taken into their confidence. As 
you learned in Chapter One, we have been judged too stupid to understand.
It is true that without the population or the bomb problem the elect 
would use some other excuse to bring about the New World Order. They 
have plans to bring about things like earthquakes, war, the Messiah, an 
extra-terrestrial landing, and economic collapse. They might bring about 
all of these things just to make damn sure that it does work. They will do 
whatever is necessary to succeed. The Illuminati has all the bases covered 
and you are going to have to be on your toes to make it through the coming 
years.
ACCORDING TO PLANS, MANY PEOPLE ARE GOING TO DIE
 BETWEEN NOW AND THE YEAR 2,000; BUT IF THESE PLANS ARE 
NOT SUCCESSFUL THE HUMAN RACE COULD BECOME EXTINCT. 
Nothing on earth can change this except a tremendous reduction and 
stabilization of the population. Without starseed this reduction and stabilization would only delay the inevitable, as eventually all raw materials will 
be completely depleted. A never-ending source of free energy will then be 
needed. That may be possible but is unlikely to solve the problem.
Without some central common need that would bind man together, a
source of free energy would most likely result in total anarchy. So you see,
what was needed in the beginning is still needed in the end. A paradigm
shift in the evolutionary consciousness of man coupled with starseed is the
most logical answer for the human race.
We must learn to accept individual responsibility for the world's 
problems or be willing to live by the terms of those who do. We must learn 
to love one another, share, deplore violence, and work with nature, not
 against it. We must do all of this while colonizing the Universe. We must 
be prepared in the process to peacefully meet and deal with an extraterrestrial intelligence. I believe they exist. 
Can you imagine what will happen if Los Angeles is hit with a 9.0 
quake, New York City is destroyed by a terrorist-planted atomic bomb, 
World War III breaks out in the Middle East, the banks and the stock 
markets collapse, Extraterrestrials land on the White House lawn, food 
disappears from the markets, some people disappear, the Messiah presents 
himself to the world, and all in a very short period of time? Can you 
imagine? The world power structure can, and will if necessary, make some
178 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
or all of those things happen to bring about the New World Order.
PATRIOTS MUST NOT BE AT HOME ON ANY NATIONAL HOLIDAY DURING THE DAY OR NIGHT EVER AGAIN UNTIL THE DANGER IS PAST. DISREGARD THIS WARNING AND YOU WILL FIND 
YOURSELF IN A CONCENTRATION CAMP. In the camp you will be 
treated for a mental illness called nationalism, common to patriots. This 
illness is not in the interest of the New World Order. Those who cannot be 
cured will be exterminated. When asked what was in store for the world in 
the coming decade, Henry Kissinger said this: ''Everything is going to be 
different. Many will suffer. A New World Order will emerge. It will be a 
much better world for those who survive. In the long run life will be better. 
The world we have wanted will be reality."



Chapter 10 Lessons from Lithuania

CHAPTER 10
LESSONS
FROM
LITHUANIA
A well regulated Militia, being necessary to the security of a 
free State, the right of the people to keep and bear Arms, shall
not be infringed.
AMENDMENT II 
Constitution of the U.S.
I know not what others may do. But as for me,
give me liberty or give me death. 
Patrick Henry
180 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
EXPLANATION
I had intended to write a long and thoroughly referenced chapter on 
the Second Amendment to the United States Constitution, the right of the 
people to keep and bear arms.
I had to eat humble pie when I read the following text entitled "Lessons from Lithuania'' by Neal Knox. It was contributed by a member of the 
Citizens Agency for Joint Intelligence. I was impressed by its simplicity 
and ability to deliver with very few words the precise message that I had 
intended to convey in twenty pages. Since I believe that sometimes less is 
more, and since my ego has nothing to do with this book and its message, 
"Lessons from Lithuania" has been printed in its entirety, with no changes, 
as the complete chapter on the Second Amendment. Try as I might, I could 
never improve upon Neal's simple statement.
My deepest appreciation to Neal Knox and The Firearms Coalition for 
permission to use "Lessons from Lithuania."
LESSONS FROM LITHUANIA
by Neal Knox 
Those who avoid and evade the reason for the Second Amendment to 
the U.S. Constitution would surely admit that if Lithuania had a Second 
Amendment, Mikhail Gorbachev violated it on March 22,1990 — Russian 
troops seized arms from the Lithuanian militia. Or was "the right of the 
people to keep and bear arms" actually violated two days earlier, when 
Premier Gorbachev ordered private citizens to turn in their hunting and 
competition guns to the Russian army within one week "for temporary 
safekeeping" or have them confiscated and their owners imprisoned? Or 
was "the right of the people to keep and bear arms" initially violated many 
years before, when the people were first prohibited from possessing guns 
without permission of government and laws were passed requiring every 
gun to be registered? In fact, the Soviet Constitution guarantees the people 
the right to keep and bear arms, and Lithuania is part of the Soviet Union 
— or so Gorbachev contends. But obviously the Soviet government pays 
no more attention to that constitutional freedom guarantee than do the 
majority of the U.S. government, the International Association of Chiefs of 
Police, or CBS and the Washington Post. What is the difference, precisely, 
between the confiscation of private firearms in Lithuania and the confiscation ordered by S. 166, the Graves bill now pending in the New Jersey 
Senate? What is the difference, precisely, between the registration law in 
Lithuania — which makes confiscation possible — and the registration of
Chapter Ten Lessons from Lithuania • 181
military-style firearms required by California's Roberti-Roos bill, which 
went into effect January 1,1990. What is the difference, precisely, between 
Lithuania's law prohibiting the people from owning military-style firearms 
and the so-called "assault rifle" bans now pending in both houses of 
Congress and in many states? The difference is that the people of the 
United States are free men and women who can trust their benevolent 
government. FOREVER?
NOTE: Nothing has so clearly demonstrated the reasons for the Second 
Amendment and the reasons it must be defended than when on Dec. 14,1981,
 when Gen. Jaruzelski declared martial law in Poland, placed all press under total 
government control, and declared all firearms licenses and gun registration certificates void — requiring the licensed owners to turn in their registered guns within 
48 hours. Of course, since the government knew where every gun was — except 
those in the hands of criminals — they had no choice but to comply. 
Please download this file, print it out and send it to your local newspaper — putting your name on it if you think it will cause more letters 
editors to run it. Also please upload it to as many other bulletin boards and 
nets as possible. 
Neal Knox 
The Firearms Coalition 
Box 6537 
Silver Spring, MD 20906 
Author's Note: This is a lesson that we hope to learn only from reading and 
not in the manner learned by the Poles and Lithuanians. After reading the 
above, I hope you will agree with me that anyone who attempts to subvert the 
Second Amendment or any other section or legal amendment of the Constitution is a traitor and should be arrested and tried for treason. I hope that you 
will copy this chapter and distribute it as widely as possible, to as many 
people as possible. Education is more than half the battle. 
In case you have not guessed by now, the fact that most Americans own at 
least one firearms weapon is the only thing that has kept the New World 
Order at bay. 
A Ray of Hope: As of January 8, 1991, less than 10% of all California gun 
owners have registered their firearms. Many Californians stood in the streets 
with weapons in hand and publicly burned the registration forms. Network 
news did not cover these demonstrations, and no mention has been made on 
television that California gun owners have ignored this unconstitutional gunregistration law.



Chapter 11 Coup de Grace

CHAPTER 11
COUP 
DE GRACE
High Crimes & Misdemeanors
Treason Committed by the Joint Chiefs
Phone Conversation with Randall Terpstra
184 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
BACKGROUND
When I finished "The Secret Government" in May 1989, a temptation 
existed to remove the material that I had written on the Nixon resignation. 
I thought that no one would ever believe that a coup had occurred in the 
United States. Furthermore, I held no hope that anyone would ever step 
forward and substantiate my claim. I was wrong. People did believe it, 
and subsequent to my delivery of the paper on July 2, 1989, three individuals have come forward to confirm that a coup did in fact take place. 
This chapter is the transcript of a phone conversation between me and one 
of those people, Randall Terpstra.
The members of the Joint Chiefs of Staff who were serving at the time 
of Nixon's resignation were asked if they had instructed their commands to 
ignore orders from the White House. They replied that the subject had 
come up but that it was not done. They lied.
CONFIRMATION OF A COUP
Randy: This is Randy.
Bill: Hi, Randy?
Randy: Yes... 
Bill: This is Bill Cooper.
Randy: Hello, Bill.
Bill: You left a message on my phone. I didn't get to hear it because 
my wife took the messages off the phone and wrote them down. I have no 
idea why you called. If you'll let me in on it...
Randy: Well, I have a copy of your documents that were provided in 
me by a friend, and uh...two things: One, I'm missing a page on one of 
them. The one that you've titled "Operation Majority," the final release. It 
looks like I'm losing page 3, 'cause on the...I have page 2 that says, "MJ-12 
is the name of the" dah-da dah-da dah-da "under the leadership of the 
director" and then it flips right over and the first line on the next page that 
I have says "means MAJI controlled." I appear to be missing a page on that 
one.
Bill: Hmmm. Okay.
Randy: The second is — I have to close my office door. One moment.
Bill: Sure... 
[Can hear door close.]
Randy: I'll be frank with you. When I first started reading, my first 
reaction was, "Gee, this is National Enquirer material, up until a point when 
I came across something that startled me a little — in the same document 
your final release document. You used two terms that I've only seen on
Chapter Eleven Coup de Grace • 185
other place, and that was MAJESTY and MAJORITY. When I was in the 
Navy, I was a radioman, and in the mid seventies — the year escapes me at
 the moment, it's been a long time, I've only had your papers since last night 
- and I was involved in a joint Apollo-Soyuz moon shot. I was an onboard 
crypto operator, which basically meant that all message traffic of a certain 
nature, which was referred to as SPECAT or special category, was off-line 
encrypted. ed. During the Apollo-Soyuz shot we established what was 
referred to as a termination with an unknown location. That location 
identified itself only as MAJORITY CONTROL. 
Bill: Okay... 
Randy: All of the message traffic we sent to and from this location was 
off-line encrypted, which was rather odd because...First, let me explain it. 
In the Navy when you send a SPECAT, or Special Category message, you 
go into what's called a clean environment. The message is drafted by the 
originator or on a piece of paper. That piece of paper is brought directly to a 
designated SPECAT operator — somebody who has a SPECAT or higher 
clearance — who enters that in the teletype on a paper tape with the hole 
punched in it for transmission. 
Bill: Right. 
[Randy did not know that one of my duties as the Petty Officer of the Watch 
in the CINCPACFLT Command Center was SPECAT operator for the Command Center.] 
Randy: At that point the SPECAT operator goes onto the circuit, 
notifies the other end that he has SPECAT traffic to transmit. The other 
end... an authorized SPECAT operator has to come on the circuit at the 
other end. He has to identify himself back to you with his SPECAT code 
number, his name and service number. Now, to me at this particular 
moment in time and space — this would be in the middle seventies — that 
was probably the most insulated means of transmitting information point 
to point in the military, because you knew who wrote the message, who 
had seen it to transmit, who had received it, all the way to its ultimate 
Bill: Uh huh... 
Randy: Well, in this particular case all of the message traffic was being 
handed to me and I was instructed to encode it through a machine called a 
KL-47, which takes standard text material and turns it out into five-letter 
blocks - random characters. And the origination...they...there were five of 
us onboard the USS Mount Whitney, and the five of us were SPECAT 
operators. We were on a revolving shift all during the Apollo-Soyuz 
mission. We were put into a controlled environment that — it was a room 
with a teletype and a cot in it — and we were told to maintain the term
186 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
circuit to MAJORITY control. Every hour a Mr. Logan from NASA would 
come down to the room, punch in because it had a cipher lock on the door, 
look at any message traffic that came in, and then we would burn it, right 
in the room. He would draft his replies, which I would enter on the KL-47, 
take the tape, transmit it and then he would burn the outgoing messages as 
well.
Bill: Uhhuh. 
[Note: The tape is made by the KL-47. It is a paper tape containing the 
five-character grouping encryption. The tape is put onto a sprocket in the 
teletype machine and it automatically sends the message to the addressee. It 
comes out at the other end in encrypted form and must be decoded. At least 
that is the way I was trained as designated SPECAT Operator to do it in the 
CINCPACFLT Command Center.]
Randy: I don't remember a lot of what was sent because it was very, 
very busy times. We had so many civilians on board the ship that it 
was...an incredible amount of work going on.
Bill: I can imagine.
Randy: I do know that hourly we received a report from MAJORITY 
CONTROL that was headed — now, this is after I've decoded it...the heading was always MAJESTY ADVISORY, over and over and over again.
Bill: Okay. 
[Note: MAJESTY ADVISORY messages were sent by CINCPACTLT to update 
or inform the President personally of beginning, ending, or ongoing operations 
that could result in serious repercussions to the United States, i.e. the bombing 
of North Vietnam after the President had informed the American people that 
no more bombing would occur.]
Randy: Now after doing this I was on for four hours, then off for four 
then on for four. We did a rollover like that for the whole Apollo-Soyuz 
mission. The other thing that I saw that tripped me off a little bit was the 
term "IACs."
Bill: Identified Alien Craft!
Randy: They...that was never...they never spelled out the acronym. It 
was just IACs.
Bill: Fantastic!
Randy: It was recurring through all of this message traffic that I was 
sending.
Bill: Randy, you are a godsend... Where have you been hiding all of 
these years?
Randy: Well, it's...how I came about getting your document is a long 
story as well, but when I read through it, it was just like a floodgate opened 
up and all these memories kept coming back.
Bill: Right.
Chapter Eleven Coup de Grace • 187
Randy: Now, at the end of it, after the Apollo-Soyuz mission concluded, the five operators, myself included, were given 50 days basket 
leave, which in the Navy meant they give you leave for free.
Bill: Sure. Yeah.
Randy: They didn't dock you for it.
Bill: Go home, get drunk, forget about this.
Randy: Exactly!
Bill: Yeah.
Randy: And when I came back 1 was taken from third class to second 
class spot promotion, and I was moved to the teletype repair shop, which 
was quite prestigious at that time.
Bill: Yeah. If s quite normal when you're exposed to this material. 
They either snuff you or promote you.
Randy: Well, I've lost contact with the other — well, I mean we had a 
ship reunion a couple a years ago, and it never occurred to me about these 
other guys. But I don't...I don't have a conscious memory of seeing them. 
But as I said when I read through this, it was rather startling to see things 
that uh, that I'm aware of.
Bill: Uhhuh.
Randy: I, I'm really interested in that missing page, actually.
 Bill: Yeah. Was there anything else that you can remember thatRandy: No, thaf s, I mean, at the time it didn't mean a damn to me. I 
mean, being a radioman, we pumped so much traffic through that ship. 
Mount Whitney is an amphibious communications command ship. 
Bill: Yeah, I'm familiar with it. Were you in the Navy at the time that 
Nixon resigned? 
Randy: No, I was not. 
Bill: Hmmmm. 
Randy: I was acting as a consultant to a company that was doing work 
for the U.S. Marine Corps, though. 
Bill: Uh huh. Were you in communications at that time? 
Randy: Yes, I was. 
Bill: Do you remember a message that came to military commands? 
Let me see if I can remember the exact words. I believe the message
said... uh. 
Randy: "Upon receipt you are instructed to no longer accept direct 
orders from the White House." 
Bill: Right! 
Randy: Actually, they didn't use the term White House. They used 
the term "TOP HAT." 
Bill: TOP HAT. I remember "White House" in the one that I saw. I
188 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
was aboard the Oriskany when I saw this.
Randy: I was working with a Lt. Col. A. P. Finlon as a civilian consultant on a device called the MCC-20, which is a multiplexer device.
Bill: His name was Finland or Fin...?
Randy: Finlon...F - I - N - L - O - N , and he was the recipient of the 
message. He was the S-3 operations director for the 6th Marine Amphibious Brigade.
Bill: Okay, you realize the implications of all of this, don't you, Randy? 
You know whaf s happening.
Randy: Yeah, I've taken a liberty with the documentation you sent me 
and I've forwarded it to someone else.
Bill: Okay, I am in dire need...I'm trying to do this as quickly and as 
cleanly as I can to get the people in this country to wake up, or we're gonna 
lose it. And if s...I'm fighting a battle pretty much on my own. There are 
people rallying around and they're helping out, and I'm getting bits of 
information here and there. I need people who have the balls to stand up 
with me and say what they saw. And I understand that, you know, when 
anybody does that they're putting themselves in danger. But I don't see 
any greater danger than the loss of our Constitution and what they have in 
store down the road. They've literally thrown it in the trash can already, 
anyway. And what, I guess what I'm asking is for your help. Would you 
be willing to go public with what you just told me?
Randy: I already have.
Bill: You have?
Randy: I forwarded your manuscript along with exactly what I've just 
told you to Lt. Col. Robert Brown, the director of the Soldier of Fortune 
magazine.
Bill: Fantastic!
Randy: I spoke with his secretary on the phone, described what it was 
all about, she in turn passed it on to him. He said, "Send it to me quick."
Bill: Fantastic!
Randy: If anybody...Soldier of Fortune magazine has the biggest 
military following of any publication in the world. If anybody was in the 
service who saw this stuff, it'll be them.
Bill: Fantastic! Great. Do you mind if I use the information that 
you've told me? Can I say that someone has corroborated what I've said?
Randy: Absolutely!
Bill: Can I use your name?
Randy: Yes!
Bill: What's your last name?
Randy: Terpstra.
Chapter Eleven Coup de Grace • 189
Bill: Let me get your address.
Randy: 130 Foothill Court, Morgan Hill, California, 95037.
Bill: Your first name is Randy?
Randy: My first name is Randall, middle name Wayne.
Bill: Okay, Randy. You're a godsend. If you were right in front of me 
I'd kiss ya. I swear to God, I have been hunting so hard for people to come 
out of the woodwork, because I know there's a lot of people out there who 
know.
Randy: They don't know it the — I mean, you've taken a lot of loose 
bits and pieces that I've had. I mean, thaf s the problem. Yes, there's a lot 
of people who know things, but they don't know what they know.
Bill: Yeah, I'm sure of that. And if s so compartmentalized that what 
they know, they don't believe is wrong.
 Randy: Well, one of the things I'm really stirring up some controversy 
about is, I want more information about NRO, and the one person who can 
get it is Col. Brown. If that exists... 
Bill: Well, NRO is the National Reconnaissance Organization that first 
put together the DELTA teams which were specifically assigned to security 
of the alien-tasked projects. They've since been used for all kinds of other 
things. Now, there's a different NRO that you have to be careful you don't 
get wrapped up in, and that's the National Reconnaissance Office, which is 
responsible for the spy satellites. 
Randy: To even throw a little more smoke on it, do you know Col. 
Charles Beckwith down in Florida? 
Hill: No. 
Randy: Col. Charles Beckwith was the one who came up with the 
whole term DELTA FORCE. That's that rescue, the hostage rescue group, 
the Green Beret unit? 
Bill: Uh huh. 
Randy: Now, he originally wanted to call it something else, and the 
White House pushed DELTA FORCE down his throat.
Bill: Do you know that I talked to Barbara Honegger? Have you read 
October Surprise?
Randy: No, I haven't. As a matter of fact, I've got your bibliography 
here and I was about to make a call to a friend of mine who runs a 
bookstore to place a rather large order.
Bill: Okay, Barbara Honegger wrote October Surprise and they refused
to print one chapter. I met her at one of the talks that I give and we got very
embroiled in conversation. She ended up coming over to my home, and we
talked face to face. There were about four other witnesses there who heard
her say this to me. She said, "At DESERT ONE, the first craft that was there
190 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
was an antigravity disc craft carrying DELTA personnel. Then the aircraft 
and the helicopters came in." And she said the purpose of the alien crafts, 
or the craft that we built from alien technology, or the alien craft that we're 
using was to ensure the sabotage of the operation.
[Note: Sometime later Barbara Honnegger related the same story on the 
Anthony Hilder "Telling It Like It Is, Like It Or Not" radio show. During the 
broadcast she said the antigravity craft was from a project named REDLIGHT. Ms. Honegger was a White House staff member during the Reagan 
and Bush administrations.]
Randy: That makes sense, because I have some 8x10 glossies of that 
Jolly Green Giant that caught on fire and burnt.
Bill: Uh huh.
Randy: I have some real problems with that. I'm a military nut. I 
spent my time in the Navy, and I've since been associated with a variety of 
military groups.
Bill: Yeah.
Randy: I have some pictures of that photo, of that helicopter that 
were...they're black & white AP photos. And it shows a burnt pattern that 
starts at the nose of the aircraft and goes back across the fuel tanks. They 
don't originate in the fuel tanks. So how in the hell did that helicopter catch 
fire right at the cockpit and outside of the cockpit, out on the fuselage?
Bill: That's a good question. The alien beam weapons will do that 
though.
Randy: Now ask a new question.
Bill: Uh huh.
Randy: The beam weapons you refer to, do they leave a pattern on the 
material, a wavy, ripply pattern?
Bill: That I don't know. All I know about the beam weapons is this. 
That they are only effective at short range; that they can paralyze a human 
being; they can levitate a human being; they can burn something out of 
your hands without hurting you, like an M-16; and fry you to a crisp and 
nothing but ashes is left. It can give you a sunburn. It depends upon the 
degree of how they want to use this thing as to exactly what it will do 
That's what I remember, and that's what my research has also confirmed 
At Ellsworth Air Force Base, in fact, one airman security patrol encountered an alien craft and aliens on the ground. He aimed his M-16 at 
them, and this weapon, this beam hit the M-16 and literally vaporized it. 
He had burns on his hands, but otherwise he was unhurt.
Randy: Have you read or heard the reports about something called 
spontaneous human combustion?
Bill: Yes! That is caused by..in fact, it can, it can be done and it's a
Chapter Eleven Coup de Grace • 191
weapon that we use. The intelligence community can get rid of some... 
Randy: I respect you a great deal. You know things that you 
shouldn't know, but you're right.
Bill: Yes, I do know things that I shouldn't know, and hopefully I can 
get it all out before something happens to me. But you know, I just, I love 
this country so much, I love the Constitiution so much. What they've been 
able to do, and the way that they've been able to fool the citizens of this 
country...I don't care what happens to me. I've got to stop this. I've got to 
do everything in my power to stop this.
Randy: Well, I'm not one of — I don't know, for lack of a better term,
I'm not one of these wild-eyed loonies that runs around doing the rest of it. 
As I told Col. Brown, "Look, I'm just a guy. I work in the computer 
industry; I make modems. I travel around the world, I talk computer 
systems. I mean, that's about it. Okay? I mean, yeah, I like to go shoot my 
gun at the target range, and I'm an armchair commando, and I like reading 
Soldier of Fortune magazine, and vicariously living adventures through 
other people. So I'm not a holy roller. I mean, I have my own belief in God, 
but I don't go around espousing it to everybody. And I'm not one of these 
esoterics that run around talking about Maitreya and the Hinduisms and
all the rest of this, the chakras and all the rest of it. I know those people are
 out there, I know they exist. As a matter of fact, I'm dating one of them, but 
that's her beliefs and if she wants to believe that, that's fine." 
Bill: Sure. 
Randy: When this came in out of the blue, I've had a lot of thought in 
my own head. You've galvanized a lot of them, especially the text where 
you were talking about the sudden influx of media and television on an 
alien presence among us in our society. I've felt that for almost two years, 
and I could never really verbalize it.
Bill: Oh yeah, they're desensitizing us so that when it happens, all of
the things that they feared in the beginning that led to all the lies that led to
all the crimes won't cause what they feared. It won't cause the collapse of
our society and our culture and our religions. It will affect the economy,
though, quite a bit.
Randy: The economy is out the door, anyway... 
Bill: Yeah, and that may be what they're waiting for, to change into a 
cashless society so it can't have that kind of effect.
Randy: Yeah, there was an awful lot, you see. I have my sister and my 
mother are both, let's say God's Green Berets. You know, they're super 
religious types — "God bless you, come to church" type thing, and at their 
urging I went through the Bible and I read it. I read it four or five times, 
and every time I came back with it I kept seeing different things. And I
192 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
have my own views on life and on a variety of things. And until I read your 
material, it never really galvanized me into thinking things. Now, like I 
said, the only thing I can really relate to you is what I experienced during 
the Apollo-Soyuz shot.
Bill: That's great! Because what you experienced there is just confirmation of what I've been telling everybody. There is a secret space program. There is a control group called MAJORITY. The President is called 
MAJESTY in connection with these things. What you were getting, the 
MAJESTY advisory messages, were to keep the President updated.
Randy: You know, the real funny part about all of that is the guy who 
would come in and was using our facility. His name was Logan, Mr. 
Logan. His title was supposed to be communications coordinator, but I 
never seen him do a damn thing except come into that room, read traffic, 
draft a reply, and then go back up to CIC. Now, we were in what was called 
the GENSER, general service side of communications. We weren't the 
spooks. The spooks had their own little quarters over on the other side of 
the ship.
Bill: Sure.
Randy: But we did have the KL-47 and the rest of the NASA types. 
The civilian types would come down to — we had a message window in 
the hallway and they'd come up and they'd hand their outgoing messages 
in the window and they would go out on the general service circuits. The 
only stuff that we handled was the, was traffic for MAJORITY CONTROL 
with MAJESTY advisories and that was it. And a lot of it, like I said, was a 
lot of textual data. I mean, there was tons of text, and it was all couched in 
techno-babble that I didn't really understand. But I do remember the 
acronym IACs everywhere. I mean completely repetitious.
Bill: Oh yeah.
Randy: You know, thaf s as much as I can offer you.
Bill: Do you remember where the messages were sent for MAJORITY 
CONTROL?
Randy: No. The location of MAJORITY CONTROL was never disclosed. The only thing I can assume is that it was somewhere north. The 
ship was anchored — well, we weren't anchored, we were at what was 
called sea-anchor, which I am sure you are aware of. We were on an 
east-west axis so that all of our antennas could be brought to bear on the 
western horizon, because thaf s the way the spacecraft was coming around 
The antenna that was assigned to my circuit was an antenna called an 
RLPA or Rotating Log Periodic Antenna, which is a very, very directional 
antenna, and it was pointed north.
Bill: What was north of you at that point?
Chapter Eleven Coup de Grace • 193
Randy: Thule, Greenland.
Bill: Thule, Greenland! Okay, hmmmm, very interesting. Also, I'm 
glad you saw the message about Nixon, because everybody thought sure 
that if anything was whacko, that was the whackiest thing that I said.
Randy: Actually, no. That one made complete sense, because those 
days surrounding Nixon's announcement — you said that message was 
sent five days previous to his announced resignation. That five-day 
period, if I remember my history correctly, was extremely turmoiled, and if 
you go back to the New York Times and read in depth the political commentary during those days, what you're going to find is that there was a 
awful lot of turbulence. I mean, five days prior there were a lot of steps 
being taken. It would not surprise me if that message was — that message 
would have been promulgated and sent five full days prior to the public 
announcement, because the public is always the last one to know. So I 
found that the most realistic of the things that were in here.
Bill: Fantastic! God is answering my prayers. Oh wow, it makes me 
so happy. Listen Randall, I've been taping this whole phone conversation. 
If you want me to destroy this tape, I will. The reason I do it is I never know 
when somebody's going to say something that is important or not.
Randy: I have nothing to hide from you, Bill.
Bill: Okay, but I just want you to know I've never betrayed a source or
used a person's name when they asked me not to. I've never used a tape if
they asked me not to. If they asked me to destroy it, I've always done that.
I try to work with everybody in a manner that they're comfortable working
with, because my goal is not to embarrass or hurt anyone, if s to stop this
thing thaf s happening.
Randy: Well, you've got another recruit.
 Bill: Fantastic! 
Randy: Question? 
Bill: Sure. 
Randy: Who is Linda Howe? 
Bill: Linda Moulton Howe is a TV producer who — I don't remember 
when it was, '78 or something like that, she made a film called "A Strange 
Harvest" about the animal mutilations, the cattle mutilations... 
Randy: Yeah, because in your notarized statement you make reference
to her. 
Bill: Yes, she contacted me along with a whole bunch of other people, 
but I tried to pick out the people who I thought were the most professional 
and the most likely to stand up under scrutiny or attempts to discredit and 
I figured she was one of those people, so... 
Randy I think, I think where you're at right now with the data you
194 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
have is — I mean, if s time to try to get it in front of people.
Bill: Yes, that's what I'm trying to do.
Randy: I'm in the process now of — as a matter of fact, when you 
called I was drafting the cover of a FAX that I'm sending to KGO Radio, 
which is a local radio talk station. Its a clear-channel station; it's heard all 
up and down the West Coast.
Bill: Great! Fantastic!
Randy: There's a moderator there named Ron Owens who — I'm 
sending this to him with a statement, "This is not being sent to you as a 
joke. Ifs being sent to you as something that I think you should take a 
minute and just read it." And I've asked him to contact you. And basically 
I said, "Ron, if ten percent of this is true, then we're in trouble."
Bill: Right. Absolutely. And there's a lot...you know, when I give a 
talk or something, someone will always stand up and say, "How do we 
know that you're not just feeding us disinformation?" and I say, "Just think 
about what you're saying. What I'm after is the truth. I'm telling you what 
I saw in these documents and where my research has led me over the 
intervening 17 years. Thaf s what I am imparting to you. I want you to go 
and verify this or not verify it or prove it wrong or whatever you can do on 
your own. And I'm perfectly willing to listen to anything that you have to 
say, but just think about what you just said. If in fact I'm giving you 
disinformation, then you're in worse trouble than you ever thought of. It 
would be better if there are aliens, because if there's not aliens that means 
this whole thing has been perpetrated by the Government for some purpose that we don't even know about. What it really means is we got the 
whole human establishment against us." And that really opens their eyes 
because it's true.
Randy: You just kicked off another memory...
And that is another story. Note: Randy Terpstra called the Billy Goodman 
Happening two days later, during the week ending November 4, 1989, and 
repeated live on the air what he told me during this taped phone conversation. 
On Sunday, November 5, 1989, I played the tape to an audience of approximately 800 people at Hollywood High School.
When President Nixon gave his farewell speech, he said he would tell the 
American people the truth about UFOs. Like James Forrestal, Richard Nixon 
found himself a prisoner on the mental ward of Bethesda Naval Hospital 
Unlike Forrestal, Nixon survived. He has remained silent.



Chapter 12 The Secret Government

CHAPTER 12
THE SECRET 
GOVERNMENT
The Origin, Identity, and Purpose of MJ-12
May 23, 1989 
Updated November 21, 1990
The signs are increasing.
The lights in the sky will appear red, blue, green, rapidly.
Someone is coming from very far and wants to meet
the people of the Earth.
Meetings have already taken place.
But those who have really seen have been silent.
Pope John XXII, 1935
196 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
PERSPECTIVE
Many sources of information were used to research this chapter. I 
originally wrote this piece as a research paper. It was first delivered at the 
MUFON Symposium on July 2,1989, in Las Vegas, Nevada. Most of this 
knowledge comes directly from, or is a result of my own research into the 
TOP SECRET/MAJIC material which I saw and read between the years 
1970 and 1973 as a member of the Intelligence Briefing Team of the Commander in Chief of the Pacific Fleet. Since some of this information was 
derived from sources that I cannot divulge for obvious reasons, and from 
published sources which I cannot vouch for, this chapter must be termed a 
hypothesis. I firmly believe that if aliens are real, this is the true nature of 
the Beast. It is the only scenario that has been able to bind all the diverse 
elements. It is the only scenario that answers all the questions and places 
the various fundamental mysteries in an arena that makes sense. It is the 
only explanation which shows the chronology of events and demonstrates 
that the chronologies, when assembled, match perfectly. The bulk of this I 
believe to be true if the material that I viewed in the Navy is authentic. As 
for the rest, I do not know, and that is why this paper must be termed a 
hypothesis. Most historic and current available evidence supports this 
hypothesis.
THE SECRET GOVERNMENT
During the years following World War II the government of the United 
States was confronted with a series of events which were to change beyond 
prediction its future and with it the future of humanity. These events were 
so incredible that they defied belief. A stunned President Truman and his 
top military commanders found themselves virtually impotent after having just won the most devastating and costly war in history.
The United States had developed, used, and was the only nation on 
earth in possession of the atomic bomb. This new weapon had the potential to destroy any enemy, and even the Earth itself. At that time the United 
States had the best economy, the most advanced technology, the highest 
standard of living, exerted the most influence, and fielded the largest and 
most powerful military forces in history. We can only imagine the confusion and concern when the informed elite of the United States Government discovered that an alien spacecraft piloted by insectlike beings from 
totally incomprehensible culture had crashed in the desert of New Mexico.
Between January 1947 and December 1952 at least 16 crashed or 
downed alien craft, 65 alien bodies, and 1 live alien were recovered. An 
additional alien craft had exploded and nothing was recovered from that
Chapter Twelve The Secret Government • 197
incident. Of these events, 13 occurred within the borders of the United 
States, not including the craft which disintegrated in the air. Of these 13, 1 
was in Arizona, 11 were in New Mexico, and 1 was in Nevada. Three 
occurred in foreign countries. Of those, 1 was in Norway and the last 2 
were in Mexico. Sightings of UFOs were so numerous that serious investigation and debunking of each report became impossible, utilizing the 
existing intelligence assets.
An alien craft was found on February 13, 1948, on a mesa near Aztec,
New Mexico. Another craft was located on March 25, 1948, in White Sands
Proving Ground. It was 100 feet in diameter. A total of 17 alien bodies
were recovered from those two crafts. Of even greater significance was the
discovery of a large number of human body parts stored within both of
these vehicles. A demon had reared its head and paranoia quickly took
hold of everyone then "in the know." The Secret lid immediately became a
Top Secret lid and was screwed down tight. The security blanket was even
tighter than that imposed upon the Manhattan Project. In the coming years
these events were to become the most closely guarded secrets in the history
of the world.
 A special group of America's top scientists were organized under the 
name Project SIGN in December 1947 to study the phenomenon. The 
whole nasty business was contained. Project SIGN evolved into Project 
GRUDGE in December 1948. A low-level collection and disinformation 
project named BLUE BOOK was formed under GRUDGE. Sixteen 
volumes were to come out of GRUDGE. "Blue Teams" were put together 
to recover the crashed disks and dead or live aliens. The Blue Teams were 
later to evolve into Alpha Teams under Project POUNCE. 
During these early years the United States Air Force and the Central 
intelligence Agency exercised complete control over the "alien secret." In 
fact, the CIA was formed by Presidential Executive Order first as the 
Central Intelligence Group for the express purpose of dealing with the 
alien presence. Later the National Security Act was passed, establishing it 
as the Central Intelligence Agency.
The National Security Council was established to oversee the intelligence community and especially the alien endeavor. A series of National
Security Council memos and Executive orders removed the CIA from the
sole task of gathering foreign intelligence and slowly but thoroughly "legalized" direct action in the form of covert activities at home and abroad.
On December 9,1947, Truman approved issuance of NSC-4, entitled 
"Coordination of Foreign Intelligence Information Measures" at the urging 
of Secretaries Marshall, Forrestal, Patterson, and the director of the State 
Department's Policy Planning Staff, George Kennan.
198 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
The Foreign and Military Intelligence, Book 1, "Final Report of the Select 
Committee to Study Governmental Operations with Respect to Intelligence 
Activities," United States Senate, 94th Congress, 2nd Session, Report No. 
94-755, April 26,1976, p. 49, states: "This directive empowered the Secretary of State to coordinate overseas information activities designed to 
counter communism."
A Top Secret annex to NSC-4, NSC-4A, instructed the director of 
Central Intelligence to undertake covert psychological activities in pursuit 
of the aims set forth in NSC-4. The initial authority given the CIA for 
covert operations under NSC-4A did not establish formal procedures for 
either coordinating or approving these operations. It simply directed the 
DCI to "undertake covert actions and to ensure, through liaison with State 
and Defense, that the resulting operations were consistent with American 
policy."
Later NSC-10/1 and NSC-10/2 were to supersede NSC-4 and NSC-4A 
and expand the covert abilities even further. The Office of Policy Coordination (OPC) was chartered to carry out an expanded program of covert 
activities. NSC-10/1 and NSC-10/2 validated illegal and extralegal practices and procedures as being agreeable to the national security leadership. 
The reaction was swift. In the eyes of the intelligence community "no 
holds were barred." Under NSC-10/1 an Executive Coordination Group 
was established to review, but not approve, covert project proposals. The 
ECG was secretly tasked to coordinate the alien projects. NSC-10/1 & /2 
were interpreted to mean that no one at the top wanted to know about 
anything until it was over and successful.
These actions established a buffer between the President and the information. It was intended that this buffer serve as a means for the President 
to deny knowledge if leaks divulged the true state of affairs. This buffer 
was used in later years for the purpose of effectively isolating succeeding 
Presidents from any knowledge of the alien presence other than what the 
Secret Government and the intelligence community wanted them to know. 
NSC-10/2 established a study panel which met secretly and was made up 
of the scientific minds of the day. The study panel was not called MJ-12. 
Another NSC memo, NSC-10/5 further outlined the duties of the study 
panel. These NSC memos and secret Executive orders set the stage for the 
creation of MJ-12 only four years later.
Secretary of Defense James Forrestal objected to the secrecy. He was a 
very idealistic and religious man. He believed that the public should be 
told. James Forrestal was also one of the first known abductees. When he 
began to talk to leaders of the opposition party and leaders of the Congress 
about the alien problem he was asked to resign by Truman. He expressed
Chapter Twelve The Secret Government • 199
his fears to many people. Rightfully, he believed that he was being 
watched. This was interpreted by those who were ignorant of the facts as 
paranoia. Forrestal later was said to have suffered a mental breakdown. 
He was ordered to the mental ward of Bethesda Naval Hospital. In spite of 
the fact that the Administration had no authority to have him committed, 
the order was carried out. In fact, it was feared that Forrestal would begin 
to talk again. He had to be isolated and discredited. His family and friends 
were denied permission to visit. Finally, on May 21, 1949, Forrestal's 
brother made a fateful decision. He notified authorities that he intended to 
remove James from Bethesda on May 22. Sometime in the early morning of 
May 22,1949, agents of the CIA tied a sheet around James Forrestal's neck, 
fastened the other end to a fixture in his room, then threw James Forrestal 
out the window. The sheet tore and he plummeted to his death. James
Forrestal's secret diaries were confiscated by the CIA and were kept in the
White House for many years. Due to public demand the diaries were 
eventually rewritten and published in a sanitized version. The real diary
information was later furnished by the CIA in book form to an agent who 
published the material as fiction. The name of the agent is Whitley Strieber
and the book is Majestic. James Forrestal became one of the first victims of 
the cover-up.
The live alien that had been found wandering in the desert from the
 1949 Roswell crash was named EBE. The name had been suggested by Dr. 
Vannevar Bush and was short for Extraterrestrial Biological Entity. EBE 
had a tendency to lie, and for over a year would give only the desired 
answer to questions asked. Those questions which would have resulted in 
an undesirable answer went unanswered. At some point during the 
second year of captivity he began to open up. The information derived 
from EBE was startling, to say the least. This compilation of his revelations 
became the foundation of what would later be called the "Yellow Book." 
Photographs were taken of EBE which, among others, I was to view years 
later Project Grudge. 
In late 1951 EBE became ill. Medical personnel had been unable to 
determine the cause of EBE's illness and had no background from which to 
draw. EBE's system was chlorophyll-based and he processed food into 
energy much the same as plants. Waste material was excreted the same as 
plants. Several experts were called in to study the illness. These specialists 
included medical doctors, botanists, and entomologists. A botanist, Dr. 
Guillermo Mendoza, was brought in to try and help him recover. Dr. 
Mendoza worked to save EBE until June 2, 1952, when EBE died. Dr. 
Mendoza became the expert on at least this type alien of biology. The 
movie E.T. is the thinly disguised story of EBE.
200 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
In a futile attempt to save EBE and to gain favor with this technologically superior race, the United States began broadcasting a call for help 
early in 1952 into the vast regions of space. The call went unanswered but 
the project, dubbed SIGMA, continued as an effort of good faith.
President Truman created the supersecret National Security Agency 
(NSA) by secret Executive order on November 4,1952. Its primary purpose was to decipher the alien communications, language, and establish a 
dialogue with the extraterrestrials. This most urgent task was a continuation of the earlier effort. The secondary purpose of the NSA was to monitor 
all communications and emissions from any and all electronic devices 
worldwide for the purpose of gathering intelligence, both human and 
alien, and to contain the secret of the alien presence. Project SIGMA was 
successful.
The NSA also maintains communications with the Luna base and 
other secret space programs. By executive order of the President, the NSA 
is exempt from all laws which do not specifically name the NSA in the text 
of the law as being subject to that law. That means that if the agency is not 
spelled out in the text of any and every law passed by the Congress it is not 
subject to that or those laws. The NSA now performs many other duties 
and in fact is the premier agency within the intelligence network. Today 
the NSA receives approximately 75% of the monies allotted to the intelligence community. The old saying "where the money goes therein the 
power resides" is true. The DCI today is a figurehead maintained as a 
public ruse. The primary task of the NSA is still alien communications, but 
now includes other extraterrestrial projects as well.
President Truman had been keeping our allies, including the Soviet 
Union, informed of the developing alien problem. This had been done in 
case the aliens turned out to be a threat to the human race. Plans were 
formulated to defend the Earth in case of invasion. Great difficulty was 
encountered in mamtaining international secrecy. It was decided that an 
outside group was necessary to coordinate and control international efforts 
in order to hide the secret from the normal scrutiny of governments by the 
press. The result was the formation of a secret ruling body which became 
known as the Bilderberg Group. The group was formed and met for the 
first time in 1952. They were named after the first publicly known meeting 
place, the Bilderberg Hotel. That public meeting took place in 1954. They 
were nicknamed The Bilderbergers. The headquarters of this group is 
Geneva, Switzerland. The Bilderbergers evolved into a secret world government that now controls everything. The United Nations was then, and 
is now, an international joke.
Beginning in 1953 a new president occupied the White House. He was
Chapter Twelve The Secret Government • 201
a man used to a structured staff organization with a chain of command. 
His method was to delegate authority and rule by committee. He made 
major decisions, but only when his advisors were unable to come to a 
consensus. His normal method was to read through or listen to several 
alternatives and then approve one. Those who worked closely with him 
have stated that his favorite comment was, "Just do whatever it takes." He 
spent a lot of time on the golf course. This was not unusual for a man who 
had been career Army with the ultimate position of Supreme Allied Commander during the war, a post which had earned him five stars. The 
President was General of the Army Dwight David Eisenhower.
During his first year in office, 1953, at least 10 more crashed discs were 
recovered along with 26 dead and 4 live aliens. Of the 10,4 were found in 
Arizona, 2 in Texas, 1 in New Mexico, 1 in Louisiana, 1 in Montana, and 1 
in South Africa. There were hundreds of sightings.
Eisenhower knew that he had to wrestle and beat the alien problem. 
He knew that he could not do it by revealing the secret to the Congress, 
Early in 1953 the new President turned to his friend and fellow member of 
the Council on Foreign Relations Nelson Rockefeller. Eisenhower and 
Rockefeller began planning the secret structure of alien-task supervision, 
which was to become a reality within one year. The idea for MJ-12 was 
thus born.
It was Nelson's uncle Winthrop Aldrich who had been crucial in
 convincing Eisenhower to run for President. The whole Rockefeller family 
and with them, the Rockefeller empire, had solidly backed Ike. Eisenhower belonged heart and soul to the Council on Foreign Relations and the 
Rockefeller family. Asking Rockefeller for help with the alien problem was 
to be the biggest mistake Eisenhower ever made for the future of the 
United States and maybe for humanity.
Within one week of Eisenhower's election he had appointed Nelson 
Rockefeller chairman of a Presidential Advisory Committee on Government Organization. Rockefeller was responsible for planning the reorganization of the government, something he had dreamed of for many 
years. New Deal programs went into one single cabinet position called the 
Department of Health, Education and Welfare. When the Congress approved the new Cabinet position in April 1953, Nelson was named to the 
post of Undersecretary to Oveta Culp Hobby.
In 1953 astronomers discovered large objects in space which were
tracked moving toward the Earth. It was first believed that they were
asteroids. Later evidence proved that the objects could only be spaceships.
Project SIGMA intercepted alien radio communications. When the objects
reached the Earth they took up a very high geosynchronous orbit around
202 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
the equator. There were several huge ships, and their actual intent was 
unknown. Project SIGMA and a new project, PLATO, through radio communications using the computer binary language, were able to arrange a 
landing that resulted in face-to-face contact with alien beings from another 
planet. This landing took place in the desert. The movie, Close Encounters 
of the Third Kind is a fictionalized version of the actual events. Project 
PLATO was tasked with establishing diplomatic relations with this race of 
space aliens. A hostage was left with us as a pledge that they would return 
and formalize a treaty.
In the meantime, a race of humanoid aliens landed at Homestead Air 
Force Base in Florida and successfully communicated with the U.S. government. This group warned us against the race orbiting the equator and 
offered to help us with our spiritual development. They demanded that 
we dismantle and destroy our nuclear weapons as the major condition. 
They refused to exchange technology citing that we were spiritually unable 
to handle the technology we already possessed. These overtures were 
rejected on the grounds that it would be foolish to disarm in the face of such 
an uncertain future. There was no track record to read from. It may have 
been an unfortunate decision.
A third landing at Muroc, now Edwards Air Force Base, took place in 
1954. The base was closed for three days and no one was allowed to enter 
or leave during that time. The historical event had been planned in advance. Details of a treaty had been agreed upon. Eisenhower arranged to 
be in Palm Springs on vacation. On the appointed day the President was 
spirited to the base. The excuse was given to the press that he was visiting 
a dentist. Witnesses to the event have stated that three UFOs flew over the 
base and then landed. Antiaircraft batteries were undergoing live-fire 
training and the startled personnel actually fired at the crafts as they 
passed overhead. Luckily, the shells missed and no one was injured.
President Eisenhower met with the aliens on February 20,1954, and a 
formal treaty between the alien nation and the United States of America 
was signed. We then received our first alien ambassador from outer space. 
He was the hostage that had been left at the first landing in the desert. His 
name and title was His Omnipotent Highness Crlll or Krlll, pronounced 
Crill or Krill. In the American tradition of disdain for royal titles he was 
secretly called Original Hostage Crlll, or Krlll. Shortly after this meeting 
President Eisenhower suffered a heart attack.
Four others present at the meeting were Franklin Allen of the Hearst 
newspapers, Edwin Nourse of Brookings Institute, Gerald Light of metaphysical research fame, and Catholic Bishop MacIntyre of Los Angeles. 
Their reaction was judged as a microcosm of what the public reaction
Chapter Twelve The Secret Government • 203
might be. Based upon this reaction, it was decided that the public could 
not be told. Later studies confirmed the decision as sound.
An emotionally revealing letter written by Gerald Light spells it out in 
chilling detail: "My dear Friend: I have just returned from Muroc. The 
report is true — devastatingly true! I made the journey in company with 
Franklin Allen of the Hearst papers and Edwin Nourse of Brookings Institute (Truman's erstwhile financial adviser) and Bishop Maclntyre of L.A. 
(confidential names for the present, please.) When we were allowed to 
enter the restricted section (after about six hours in which we were checked 
on every possible item, event, incident and aspect of our personal and 
public lives), I had the distinct feeling that the world had come to an end 
with fantastic realism. For I have never seen so many human beings in a 
state of complete collapse and confusion, as they realized that their own 
world had indeed ended with such finality as to beggar description. The 
reality of "other-plane" aeroforms is now and forever removed from the 
realms of speculation and made a rather painful part of the consciousness 
of every responsible scientific and political group. During my two days' 
visit I saw five separate and distinct types of aircraft being studied and 
handled by our Air Force officials — with the assistance and permission of 
the Etherians!
"I have no words to express my reactions. It has finally happened. It
is now a matter of history. President Eisenhower, as you may already
know, was spirited over to Muroc one night during his visit to Palm
Springs recently. And it is my conviction that he will ignore the terrific
conflict between the various "authorities" and go directly to the people via
radio and television — if the impasse continues much longer. From what I
could gather, an official statement to the country is being prepared for
delivery about the middle of May."
We know that no such announcement was ever made. The silencecontrol group won the day. We also know that two more ships, for which
we can find no witnesses, either landed sometime after the three or were
already at the base before the three landed. Gerald Light specifically states
that five ships were present and were undergoing study by the Air Force.
His metaphysical experience is evident in that he calls the entities
"Etherians." Gerald Light capitalized "Etherians," calling attention to the
fact that these beings might have been viewed as gods by Mr. Light.
The alien emblem was known as the "Trilateral insignia" and was 
displayed on the craft and worn on the alien uniforms. Both of these 
landings and the second meeting were filmed. These films exist today.
The treaty stated that the aliens would not interfere in our affairs and 
we would not interfere in theirs. We would keep their presence on earth a
204 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
secret. They would furnish us with advanced technology and would help 
us in our technological development. They would not make any treaty 
with any other Earth nation. They could abduct humans on a limited and 
periodic basis for the purpose of medical examination and monitoring of 
our development, with the stipulation that the humans would not be 
harmed, would be returned to their point of abduction, would have no 
memory of the event, and that the alien nation would furnish Majesty 
Twelve with a list of all human contacts and abductees on a regularly 
scheduled basis.
It was agreed that each nation would receive the ambassador of the 
other for as long as the treaty remained in force. It was further agreed that 
the alien nation and the United States would exchange 16 personnel with 
the purpose of learning of each other. The alien "guests'' would remain on 
earth. The human "guests" would travel to the alien point of origin for a 
specified period of time, then return, at which point a reverse exchange 
would be made. A reenactment of this event was dramatized in the movie 
Close Encounters of the Third Kind. A tipoff to who works for whom can be 
determined by the fact that Dr. J. Allen Hynek served as the technical 
advisor for the film. I noticed that the Top Secret report containing the 
official version of the truth of the alien question, entitled Project GRUDGE, 
which I read while in the Navy, was co-authored by Lt. Col. Friend and Dr. 
J. Allen Hynek, who was cited as a CIA asset attached to Project GRUDGE 
— Dr. Hynek, the one who debunked many legitimate UFO incidents 
when he functioned as the scientific member of the very public Project 
BLUEBOOK. Dr. Hynek is the man responsible for the infamous "it was 
only swamp gas" statement.
It was agreed that bases would be constructed underground for the 
use of the alien nation and that two bases would be constructed for the joint 
use of the alien nation and the United States Government. Exchange of 
technology would take place in the jointly occupied bases. These alien 
bases would be constructed under Indian reservations in the Four Corners 
area of Utah, Colorado, New Mexico and Arizona, and one would be 
constructed in an area known as Dreamland. Dreamland was built in the 
Mojave desert near, or in, a place called Yucca. I cannot remember if it was 
Yucca Valley, Yucca Flat, or Yucca Proving Ground, but Yucca Valley is what 
I always seem to want to say. More UFO sightings and incidents occur in 
the Mojave desert of California than any other place in the world. So many, 
in fact, that no one even bothers to make reports. Anyone who ventures 
into the desert to talk to the residents will be astounded by the frequency of 
activity and with the degree of acceptance demonstrated by those who 
have come to regard UFOs as normal.
Chapter Twelve The Secret Government • 205
All alien areas are under complete control of the Naval Department, 
according to the documents that I read. All personnel who work in these 
complexes receive their checks from the Navy through a subcontractor. 
The checks never make reference to the government or the Navy. Construction of the bases began immediately, but progress was slow. Large 
amounts of money were made available in 1957. Work continued on the 
Yellow Book.
Project REDLIGHT was formed and experimentation in test-flying 
alien craft was begun in earnest. A super-Top Secret facility was built at 
Groom Lake in Nevada in the midst of the weapons test range. It was 
code-named Area 51. The installation was placed under the Department of 
the Navy and all personnel required a Q clearance as well as Executive 
presidential, called MAJESTIC) approval. This is ironic, due to the fact 
that the President of the United States does not have clearance to visit the 
site. The alien base and exchange of technology actually took place in an 
area code-named Dreamland above ground, and the underground portion 
was dubbed "the Dark Side of the Moon." According to the documentation that I read, at least 600 alien beings actually resided full time at this site 
along with an unknown number of scientists and CIA personnel. Due to 
the fear of implantation, only certain people were allowed to interface with 
the alien beings, and those personnel were and are watched and monitored 
continuously.
The Army was tasked to form a supersecret organization to furnish
security for the alien-tasked projects. This organization became the National Reconnaissance Organization based at Fort Carson, Colorado. The
specific teams trained to secure the projects were called Delta. Lt. Col.
James "Bo" Gritz was a Delta Force Commander.
A second project code-named SNOWBIRD was promulgated to explain away any sightings of the REDLIGHT crafts as being Air Force 
experiments. The SNOWBIRD crafts were manufactured using conventional technology and were flown for the press on several occasions. 
Project SNOWBIRD was also used to debunk legitimate public sightings of 
alien craft (UFOs to the public, IACs to those in the know). Project SNOWBIRD was very successful, and reports from the public declined steadily 
until recent years.
A multimillion-dollar Secret fund was organized and kept by the
Military Office of the White House. This fund was used to build over 75
deep underground facilities. Presidents who asked were told the fund was
used to build deep underground shelters for the President in case of war.
Only a few were built for the President. Millions of dollars were funneled
through this office to Majesty Twelve and then out to the contractors. It
206 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
was used to build Top Secret alien bases as well as Top Secret DUMB (Deep 
Underground Military Bases) and the facilities promulgated by Alternative 
2 throughout the nation. President Johnson used this fund to build a movie 
theater and pave the road on his ranch. He had no idea of its true purpose.
The secret White House underground-construction fund was set up in 
1957 by President Eisenhower. The funding was obtained from Congress 
under the guise of "construction and maintenance of secret sites where the 
President could be taken in case of military attack: Presidential Emergency 
Sites." The sites are literally holes in the ground, deep enough to withstand 
a nuclear blast, and are outfitted with state-of-the-art communications 
equipment. To date there are more than 75 sites spread around the country 
which were built using money from this fund. The Atomic Energy Commission has built at least an additional 22 underground sites. See the 
chapter on Mt. Weather.
The location and everything to do with these sites were and are considered and treated as Top Secret. The money was and is in control of the 
Military Office of the White House, and was and is laundered through so 
circuitous a web that even the most knowledgeable spy or accountant 
cannot follow it. As of 1980 only a few at the beginning and end of this web 
knew what the money was for. At the beginning were Representative 
George Mahon of Texas, the chairman of the House Appropriations Committee and of its Defense Subcommittee; and Representative Robert Sikes 
of Florida, chairman of the House Appropriations Military Construction 
Subcommittee. Today it is rumored that House Speaker Jim Wright controlled the money in Congress and that a power struggle removed him. At 
the end of the line were the President, Majesty Twelve, the director of the 
Military Office and a commander at the Washington Navy Yard.
The money was authorized by the Appropriations Committee, who 
allocated it to the Department of Defense as a Top Secret item in the Army 
construction program. The Army, however, could not spend it and in fact 
did not even know what it was for. Authorization to spend the money was 
in reality given to the Navy. The money was channeled to the Chesapeake 
Division of the Navy Engineers, who did not know what it was for, either. 
Not even the commanding officer, who was an admiral, knew what the 
fund was to be used for. Only one man, a Navy commander who was 
assigned to the Chesapeake Division but in reality was responsible only to 
the Military Office of the White House, knew of the actual purpose, 
amount, and ultimate destination of the Top Secret money. The total secrecy surrounding the fund meant that almost every trace of it could be made 
to disappear by the very few people who controlled it. There has never 
been and most likely never will be an audit of this secret money.
Chapter Twelve The Secret Government • 207
Large amounts of money were transferred from the Top Secret fund to
a location at Palm Beach, Florida, that belongs to the Coast Guard called 
Peanut Island. The island is adjacent to property which was owned by 
Joseph Kennedy. The money was said to have been used for landscaping 
and general beautification. Some time ago a TV news special on the Kennedy assassination told of a Coast Guard officer transferring money in a 
briefcase to a Kennedy employee across this property line. Could this have 
been a secret payment to the Kennedy family for the loss of their son John
F. Kennedy? The payments continued through the year 1967 and then 
stopped. The total amount transferred is unknown and the actual use of 
the money is unknown.
Meanwhile, Nelson Rockefeller changed positions again. This time he
was to take C. D. Jackson's old position, which had been called the Special
Assistant for Psychological Strategy. With Nelson's appointment the name
was changed to the Special Assistant for Cold War Strategy. This position
would evolve over the years into the same position Henry Kissinger was
ultimately to hold under President Nixon. Officially he was to give "advice
and assistance in the development of increased understanding and
coperation among all peoples." The official description was a smoke
screen, for secretly he was the Presidential Coordinator for the Intelligence
Community. In his new post Rockefeller reported directly, and solely, to
the President. He attended meetings of the Cabinet, the Council on Foreign
Economic Policy, and the National Security Council, which was the highest
policy-making body in the government.
Nelson Rockefeller was also given a second important job as the head
of the secret unit called the Planning Coordination Group, which was
formed under NSC 5412/1 in March 1955. The group consisted of different
ad hoc members, depending on the subject on the agenda. The basic
members were Rockefeller, a representative of the Department of Defense,
a representative of the Department of State, and the Director of Central
Intelligence. It was soon called the 5412 Committee or the Special Group.
NSC 5412/1 established the rule that covert operations were subject to
approval by an executive committee, whereas in the past these operations
were initiated solely on the authority of the Director of Central Intelligence.
By secret Executive Memorandum NSC 5510, Eisenhower had preceded NSC 5412/1 to establish a permanent committee (not ad hoc) to be
known as Majesty Twelve (MJ-12) to oversee and conduct all covert activities concerned with the alien question. NSC 5412/1 was created to
explain the purpose of these meetings when Congress and the press became curious. 
Majesty Twelve was made up of Nelson Rockefeller, Director of Cen-
208 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
tral Intelligence Allen Welsh Dulles, Secretary of State John Foster Dulles, 
Secretary of Defense Charles E. Wilson, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of 
Staff Admiral Arthur W. Radford, Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation J. Edgar Hoover, six men from the executive committee of the 
Council on Foreign Relations known as the "Wise Men," six men from the 
executive committee of the JASON Group, and Dr. Edward Teller.
The JASON Group is a secret scientific group formed during the 
Manhattan Project and administered by the Mitre Corporation. The inner 
core of the Council on Foreign Relations recruits its members from the 
Skull & Bones and the Scroll & Key societies of Harvard and Yale. The Wise 
Men are key members of the Council on Foreign Relations and also members of a secret Order of the Quest known as the JASON Society.
There were 19 members of Majesty Twelve. The first rule of Majesty 
Twelve was that no order could be given and no action could be taken 
without a majority vote of twelve in favor, thus Majority Twelve. Orders 
issued by Majesty Twelve became known as Majority Twelve directives.
This group was made up over the years of the top officers and directors of the Council on Foreign Relations and later the Trilateral Commission. Gordon Dean, George Bush and Zbigniew Brzezinski were among 
them. The most important and influential of the Wise Men were John 
McCloy, Robert Lovett, Averell Harriman, Charles Bohlen, George Kennan, 
and Dean Acheson. Their policies were to last well into the decade of the 
'70s. It is significant that President Eisenhower as well as the first six 
Majesty Twelve members from the Government were also members of the 
Council on Foreign Relations. This gave control of the most secret and 
powerful group in government to a special-interest club that was itself 
controlled by the Illuminati.
Thorough researchers will soon discover that not all of the Wise Men 
attended Harvard or Yale and not all of them were chosen for Skull & Bones 
or Scroll & Key membership during their college years. You will be able to 
quickly clear up the mystery by obtaining the book The Wise Men by Walter 
Isaacson and Evan Thomas, Simon and Schuster, New York. Under illustration #9 in the center of the book you will find the caption: "Lovett 
with the Yale Unit, above far right, and on the beach: His initiation into 
Skull and Bones came at an air base near Dunkirk." I have found that 
members were chosen on an ongoing basis by invitation based upon merit 
postcollege and were not confined to Harvard or Yale attendees only 
Because of this fact, a complete list of Skull & Bones members can never be 
compiled from the catalogues or addresses of the college segment of the 
Russell Trust, also known as the Brotherhood of Death, or the Skull & 
Bones. Now you know why it has been impossible to pinpoint the mem-
Chapter Twelve The Secret Government • 209
bership either by number or by name. I believe that the answer lies hidden 
in the CFR files, if files exist.
A chosen few were later initiated into the secret branch of the Order of 
the Quest known as the JASON Society. They are all members of the 
Council on Foreign Relations and at that time were known as the Eastern 
Establishment. This should give you a clue to the far-reaching and serious 
nature of these most secret college societies. The society is alive and well 
today, but now includes members of the Trilateral Commission as well. 
The Trilateralists existed secretly before 1973. The name of the Trilateral 
Commission was taken from the alien flag known as the Trilateral Insignia. 
Majesty Twelve was to survive right up to the present day. Under Eisenhower and Kennedy it was erroneously called the 5412 Committee, or more 
correctly, the Special Group. In the Johnson administration it became the 
303 Committee because the name 5412 had been compromised in the book 
The Secret Government. Actually, NSC 5412/1 was leaked to the author to 
hide the existence of NSC 5410. Under Nixon, Ford, and Carter it was 
called the 40 Committee, and under Reagan it became the PI-40 Committee. 
Over all those years only the name changed.
By 1955 it became obvious that the aliens had deceived Eisenhower
and had broken the treaty. Mutilated humans were being found along with
mutilated animals across the United States. It was suspected that the aliens
were not submitting a complete list of human contacts and abductees to
Majesty Twelve and it was suspected that not all abductees had been
returned. The Soviet Union was suspected of interacting with them, and
this proved to be true. The aliens stated that they had been, and were then,
manipulating masses of people through secret societies, witchcraft, magic,
the occult, and religion. You must understand that this claim could also be
a manipulation. After several Air Force combat air engagements with alien
craft it also became apparent that our weapons were no match against
them.
In November 1955 NSC-5412/2 was issued establishing a study committee to explore "all factors which are involved in the making and implementing of foreign policy in the nuclear age/' This was only a blanket 
of snow that covered the real subject of study, the alien question.
By secret Executive Memorandum NSC 5511 in 1954, President Eisenhower had commissioned the study group to "examine all the facts, evidence, lies, and deception and discover the truth of the alien question." 
NSC 5412/2 was only a cover that had become necessary when the press 
began inquiring as to the purpose of regular meetings of such important 
men. The first meetings began in 1954 and were called the Quantico 
meetings because they met at the Quantico Marine Base. The study group
210 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
was made up solely of 35 members of the Council on Foreign Relations' 
secret study group. Dr. Edward Teller was invited to participate. Dr. 
Zbigniew Brzezinski was the study director for the first 18 months. Dr. 
Henry Kissinger was chosen as the group's study director for the second 18 
months beginning in November 1955. Nelson Rockefeller was a frequent 
visitor during the study.
THE STUDY GROUP MEMBERS
Gordon Dean, Chairman
Dr. Henry Kissinger, Study Director
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Study Director
Dr. Edward Teller Frank Altschul
Maj. Gen. Richard C. Lindsay Hamilton Fish Armstrong
Hanson W. Baldwin Maj. Gen. James McCormack, Jr.
Lloyd V. Berkner Robert R. Bowie
Frank C. Nash McGeorge Bundy
Paul H. Nitze William A. M. Burden
Charles P. Noyes John C. Campbell
Frank Pace, Jr. Thomas K. Finletter
James A. Perkins George S. Franklin, Jr.
Don K. Price I.I. Rabi
David Rockefeller Roswell L. Gilpatric
Oscar M. Ruebhausen N.E. Halaby
Lt. Gen. James M. Gavin Gen. Walter Bedell Smith
Caryl P. Haskins Henry DeWolf Smyth
James T. Hill, Jr. Shields Warren
Joseph E. Johnson Carroll L. Wilson
Mervin J. Kelly Arnold Wolfers
The second-phase meetings were also held at the Marine base at 
Quantico, Virginia, and the group became known as Quantico II. Nelson 
Rockefeller built a retreat somewhere in Maryland for Majesty Twelve and 
the study committee. It could be reached only by air. In this manner they 
could meet away from public scrutiny. This secret meeting place is known 
by the code name "the Country Club." Complete living, eating, recreation, 
library, and meeting facilities exist at the location. (The Aspen Institute is 
not the Country Club.)
The study group was publicly terminated in the later months of 1956.
Chapter Twelve The Secret Government • 211
Henry Kissinger wrote what was officially termed the results in 1957 as 
Nuclear Weapons and Foreign Policy, published for the Council on Foreign 
Relations by Harper & Brothers, New York. In truth, the manuscript had 
already been 80% written while Kissinger was at Harvard. The study 
group continued, veiled in secrecy. A clue to the seriousness Kissinger 
attached to the study can be found in statements by his wife and friends. 
Many of them stated that Henry would leave home early each morning and 
return late each night without speaking to anyone or responding to anyone. It seemed as if he were in another world which held no room for 
outsiders.
These statements are very revealing. The revelations of the alien 
presence and actions during the study must have been a great shock. 
Henry Kissinger was definitely out of character during this time. He 
would never again be affected in this manner, no matter the seriousness of 
any subsequent event. On many occasions he would work very late into 
the night after having already put in a full day. This behavior eventually 
led to divorce.
A major finding of the alien study was that the public could not be 
told. It was believed that this would most certainly lead to economic 
collapse, collapse of the religious structure, and national panic, which 
could lead into anarchy. Secrecy thus continued. An offshoot of this finding was that if the public could not be told, Congress could not be told. 
Funding for the projects and research would have to come from outside the 
Government. In the meantime money was to be obtained from the military 
budget and from CIA confidential, nonappropriated funds.
Another major finding was that the aliens were using humans and 
animals for a source of glandular secretions, enzymes, hormonal secretions, blood plasma and possibly in genetic experiments. The aliens explained these actions as necessary to their survival. They stated that their 
genetic structure had deteriorated and that they were no longer able to 
reproduce. They stated that if they were unable to improve their genetic 
structure, their race would soon cease to exist. We looked upon their 
explanations with extreme suspicion. Since our weapons were literally 
useless against the aliens, Majesty Twelve decided to continue friendly 
diplomatic relations until such time as we were able to develop a technology which would enable us to challenge them on a military basis. Overtures would have to be made to the Soviet Union and other nations to join 
forces for the survival of humanity. In the meantime plans were developed 
to research and construct two weapons systems using conventional and 
nuclear technology, which would hopefully bring us to parity.
The results of the research were Projects JOSHUA and EXCALIBUR.
212 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
JOSHUA was a weapon captured from the Germans which was capable of 
shattering 4-inch-thick armor plate at a range of two miles. It used aimed, 
low-frequency sound waves, and it was believed that this weapon would 
be effective against the alien craft and beam weapons. EXCALIBUR was a 
weapon carried by missile not to rise above 30,000 feet above ground level 
(AGL), not to deviate from designated target more than 50 meters, able to 
would penetrate "1,000 meters of tufa, hard-packed soil such as that found 
in New Mexico," carry a one-megaton warhead, and intended for use in 
destroying the aliens in their underground bases. JOSHUA was developed 
successfully but never used, to my knowledge. EXCALIBUR was not 
pushed until recent years and now, we are told, there is an unprecedented 
effort to develop this weapon. The public would be told that EXCALIBUR 
would be needed to take out Soviet underground command posts. We 
know that is not true because one rule of war is that you try not to destroy 
the leaders. They are needed either to unconditionally surrender or to 
negotiate terms. Leaders are also needed to ensure peaceful transition of 
power and the compliance of the populace to all negotiated or dictated 
terms.
The events at Fatima in the early part of the century were scrutinized. 
On the suspicion that it was alien manipulation, an intelligence operation 
was put into motion to penetrate the secrecy surrounding the event. The 
United States utilized its Vatican moles and soon obtained the entire Vatican study, which included the prophecy. This prophecy stated that if man 
did not turn from evil and place himself at the feet of Christ the planet 
would self-destruct and the events described in the book of Revelations 
would indeed come to pass. The prophecy demanded that Russia be 
consecrated to the Sacred Heart. It stated that a child would be born who 
would unite the world with a plan for world peace and a false religion. The 
people would discern that he was evil and was indeed the Anti-Christ 
World War III would begin in the Middle East with an invasion of Israel by 
a United Arab nation using conventional weapons, which would culminate 
in a nuclear holocaust. Most of the life on this planet would suffer horribly 
and die as a result. The return of Christ would occur shortly thereafter.
When the aliens were confronted with this finding they confirmed that 
it was true. The aliens explained that they had created us through genetic 
manipulation in a laboratory. They stated that they had manipulated the 
human race through religion, satanism, witchcraft, magic, and the occult. 
They further explained that they were capable of time travel, and the 
events would indeed come to pass if the conditions were not met. Later 
exploitation of alien technology by the United States and the Soviet Union, 
utilizing time travel in a project named RAINBOW, confirmed the proph-
Chapter Twelve The Secret Government • 213
ecy. The aliens showed a hologram, which they claimed was the actual 
crucifixion of Christ. The Government filmed the hologram. We did not 
know whether to believe them. Were they using our GENUINE religions 
to manipulate us? Or were they indeed the source of our religions with 
which they had been manipulating us all along? Or was this the beginning 
scenario of the genuine END TIMES and the RETURN OF CHRIST which 
had been predicted in the Bible? I DO NOT KNOW THE ANSWER.
A symposium was held in 1957 which was attended by some of the 
great scientific minds then living. They reached the conclusion that by, or 
shortly after, the year 2000 the planet WOULD self-destruct due to increased population and man's exploitation of the environment WITHOUT 
ANY HELP FROM GOD OR THE ALIENS.
By secret Executive order of President Eisenhower, the JASON Scholars were ordered to study this scenario and make recommendations from
their findings. The JASON Society CONFIRMED the finding of the scientistts and made three recommendations called ALTERNATIVES 1,2, and 3.
Alternative 1 was to use nuclear devices to blast holes in the stratosphere from which the heat and pollution could escape into space. They 
would then change the human cultures from that of exploitation into 
cultures of environmental protection. Of the three this was decided to be 
the least likely to succeed due to the inherent nature of man and the 
additional damage the nuclear explosions would themselves create. The 
existence of a hole in the ozone layer may indicate that Alternative 1 might 
have been attempted. This is, however, only conjecture.
Alternative 2 was to build a vast network of underground cities and 
tunnels in which a select representation of all cultures and occupations 
would survive and carry on the human race. The rest of humanity would 
be left to fend for themselves on the surface of the planet. We know that 
these facilities have been built and are ready and waiting for the chosen few 
to be notified.
Alternative 3 was to exploit the alien and conventional technology in 
order for a select few to leave the earth and establish colonies in outer 
space. I am not able to either confirm or deny the existence of "batch 
consignments" of human slaves, which would be used for the manual 
labor as a part of the plan. The Moon, code-named ADAM, was the object 
of primary interest, followed by the planet Mars, code-named EVE. I am 
now in possession of official NASA photographs of one of the moon bases. 
I believe that the Mars colony is also a reality.
As a delaying action, ALL THREE ALTERNATIVES included birth 
control, sterilization, and the introduction of deadly microbes to control or 
slow the growth of the Earth's population. AIDS is only ONE result of
214 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
these plans. It was decided BY THE ELITE that since the population must 
be reduced and controlled, it would be in the best interest of the human 
race to rid ourselves of the undesirable elements of our society. Specific 
targeted populations included BLACKS, HISPANICS, and HOMOSEXUALS. The joint U.S. and Soviet leadership dismissed Alternative 1 
but ordered work to begin on Alternatives 2 and 3 virtually at the same 
time.
In 1959 the Rand Corporation hosted a Deep Underground Construction Symposium. In the symposium report, machines are pictured and 
described which could bore a tunnel 45 feet in diameter at the rate of 5 feet 
per hour in 1959. It also displays pictures of huge tunnels and underground vaults containing what appear to be complex facilities and possibly 
even cities. It appears that the previous five years of all-out underground 
construction had made significant progress by that time.
The ruling powers decided that one means of funding the alien-connected and other "black" projects was to corner the illegal drug market. 
The English and French had established a historical precedent when they 
exploited the opium trade in the Far East and used it to fill their coffers and 
gain a solid foothold in China and Viet Nam, respectively.
A young ambitious member of the Council on Foreign Relations was 
approached. His name is George Bush, who at the time was the president 
and CEO of the offshore division of Zapata Oil, based in Texas. Zapata Oil 
was experimenting with the new technology of offshore drilling. It was 
correctly thought that the drugs could be shipped from South America to 
the offshore platforms by fishing boat, to be taken from there to shore by 
the normal transportation used for supplies and personnel. By this method 
no customs or law enforcement agency would subject the cargo to search.
George Bush agreed to help, and organized the operation in conjunction with the CIA. The plan worked better than anyone had dreamed. It 
has since expanded worldwide. There are now many other methods of 
bringing the illegal drugs into the country. It must always be remembered 
that George Bush began the sale of drugs to our children. The CIA now 
controls most of the world's illegal drug markets.
The official space program was boosted by President Kennedy in his 
inaugural address when he mandated that the United States put a man on 
the Moon before the end of the decade. Although innocent in its conception, this mandate enabled those in charge to funnel vast amounts of 
money into black projects and conceal the REAL space program from the 
American people. A similar program in the Soviet Union served the same 
purpose. In fact, a joint alien, United States, and Soviet Union base existed 
on the Moon at the very moment Kennedy spoke the words.
Chapter Twelve The Secret Government • 215
On May 22,1962, a space probe landed on Mars and confirmed the 
existence of an environment which could support life. Not long afterward 
the construction of a colony on the planet Mars began in earnest. Today I 
believe a colony exists on Mars populated by specially selected people 
from different cultures and occupations taken from all over the Earth. A 
public charade of antagonism between the Soviet Union and the United 
States has been maintained over all these years in order to fund projects in 
the name of national defense when in fact we are the closest allies.
At some point President Kennedy discovered portions of the truth
 concerning the drugs and the aliens. He issued an ultimatum in 1963 to 
Majesty Twelve. President Kennedy assured them that if they did not clean 
up the drug problem, he would. He informed Majesty Twelve that he 
intended to reveal the presence of aliens to the American people within the 
following year, and ordered a plan developed to implement his decision, 
President Kennedy was not a member of the Council on Foreign Relations 
and knew nothing of Alternative 2 or Alternative 3. (Although some 
researchers claim JFK was a member of the CFR, I can find no legitimate list 
with his name upon it.) Internationally, the operations were supervised by 
the Bilderberg elite committee known as the Policy Committee. In the 
United States they were supervised by the executive committee of the CFR 
and in the Soviet Union by its sister organization. 
President Kennedy's decision struck fear into the hearts of those in 
charge. His assassination was ordered by the Policy Committee and the 
order was carried out by agents in Dallas. President John F. Kennedy was 
murdered by the Secret Service agent who drove his car in the motorcade 
and the act is plainly visible in the Zapruder film. WATCH THE DRIVER 
AND NOT KENNEDY WHEN YOU VIEW THE FILM. All of the witnesses who were close enough to the car to see William Greer shoot Kennedy were themselves all murdered within two years of the event. The 
Warren Commission was a farce, and Council on Foreign Relations members made up the majority of its panel. They succeeded in snowing the 
American people. 
Many other patriots who attempted to reveal the alien secret have also 
been murdered throughout the intervening years. At the present time over 
200 material witnesses or people actually involved with the assassination 
are dead. The odds against this happening are so high that no one has been 
able to calculate them. The odds against the first 18 to die within two years 
of the assassination were calculated at one hundred thousand trillion to one. 
You can order a copy of the film by sending $30 + $4 postage & handling to 
William Cooper, 19744 Beach Blvd., Suite 301, Huntington Beach, California 92648.
216 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
In December 19881 had a phone conversation during which I told John 
Lear what I had seen in the Navy concerning the Kennedy assassination. I 
told him that the Top Secret documents stated that the act was plainly 
visible in a film withheld from the public. I told John that I had been 
looking for a film that showed Greer shoot JFK for 16 years but had not 
found one. I was shocked and very pleasantly surprised when John asked 
me, "Would you like to see it?" I, of course, replied in the affirmative and 
John invited Annie and me to his home in Las Vegas. We spent four days 
with John. He not only showed me the film but gave me a video copy. I 
showed the video whenever I spoke to a group of people. The film is titled 
Dallas Revisited, John told me that he obtained it from a CIA acquaintance 
whom he was not at liberty to name. I later found out the originator of that 
version of the Zapruder film was Lars Hansson. John Lear was showing 
the film at every meeting that he conducted.
Shortly after Lear gave me a copy of the film, Lars Hansson called and 
asked if he could drop by to meet with me at my home in Fullerton, 
California. I told him he could and asked him to bring a better copy of the 
film if he had one. Lars said that he would. He stated that he would also 
bring a film on a man named Bo Gritz, of whom I had never heard. Mr. 
Hansson informed me that he had made the video for Bo Gritz and John 
Lear and that both were using it in their lectures. I found out much later 
that Bo Gritz was selling the tape for $10 per copy.
Lars came to the house, brought the films on videotape and we spoke 
for about an hour. His main purpose was to tell me that he wanted me to 
expose people to the film but did not want me to connect him to the film in 
any manner. I agreed not to divulge the source and I kept my word. I 
began to use the tape in my lectures. When I found out that Bo Gritz was 
making it available, I bowed to public pressure and also made it available.
Some time later I read an L.A.-based newsletter (forgot the name) in 
which Lars Hansson stated that he did not know that I had the film and did 
not know that I was showing it at lectures. Hansson stated in the newsletter that he was at my Hollywood High lecture on November 5,1989, and 
that he tried to protest my use of it during the question-and-answer period 
but that he never had a chance to be recognized. We videotaped that event, 
and at the end I asked anyone with questions or comments to walk to a 
microphone that we had placed in the aisle. I have examined every inch of 
that videotape and Lars Hansson never got up from his seat, nor did he 
ever raise his hand, nor did he attempt in any way to be recognized.
Lars later called me again and asked me not to use his voice on the 
tape, his voice where he says with no hesitation or qualification what-
 Chapter Twelve The Secret Government • 217
soever, as he narrates the videotape, "The driver of the car turns with his 
left arm over his right shoulder with a pistol and fires. You see the .45 
automatic, .45-caliber nickel-plated automatic weapon in his left hand, 
He's firing over his right shoulder; you see it in relief. You see his head 
pointing backwards towards the President. In this enhanced close-up you 
see the impact of the bullet upon the President. The force of the shot drives 
him violently backward against the back of the seat. You see Mrs. Kennedy 
react in horror." Then later in the film Lars Hansson makes this statement: 
"You can clearly see his [the driver's] head turning and his arm, and the 
weapon extending into view over his right shoulder." I agreed not to use 
his voice. In subsequent lectures I showed the tape with no audio. As it 
turned out, people were able to see it better with no narration. 
It is important that you understand the above, because in the late 
summer of 1990, after I had been showing the film for over a year and a 
half, Lars Hansson began to show up on radio proclaiming that Greer, the 
driver, did not shoot the President. Lars Hansson showed up at my fall 
1990 Beverly Hills High School lecture and disrupted the lecture, yelling 
out taunts and otherwise making an ass out of himself. When the lecture 
ended he accosted people in the lobby and, along with David Lifton, 
attempted to convince members of the audience that they didn't really see 
Greer shoot Kennedy. To their credit most of the audience told Hansson 
and Lifton to stick it where the sun don't shine. Once people see it with 
their own eyes they can no longer be fooled. Hansson, Lifton, Grodin, and 
the other agents of the Secret Government are running out of time. Americans are catching on to the scam. I shudder to think what will happen to 
these people when Americans finally get angry. Do not forget that Lear 
informed me that his source for the film was a CIA agent who later turned 
out to be Lars Hansson. 
Hansson later claimed that I violated his copyright. He had no copyright. Hansson himself had violated someone's copyright by making the 
film and giving it to me, Lear, and Gritz. I didn't and still don't give a 
damn about copyright on THIS particular film. If I did, no one would ever 
know who really killed our President. 
Bo Gritz stated on radio that he felt exactly the same way. Hansson 
never attacked Lear or Gritz, who still show the tape, and Gritz still makes 
it available. I wonder why? Are Lear, Hansson and Gritz working
together? 
Robert Grodin then entered the picture. He publicly challenged me to 
appear and debate him. He claimed that he had a copy of the Zapruder 
film showing that Greer never took his hands off the wheel of the car. 
Grodin is an active secret government agent whose job it is to confuse the
218 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
public and perpetuate the cover-up.
I called Bob Grodin and accepted his challenge. I invited him to 
appear with me at Beverly Hills High School and show his film. I would 
show my film. The audience would decide. He refused. He refused 
because he knows what I know, that the audience would boo him out of 
town. Grodin knows that Greer shot Kennedy because he is part of the 
cover-up.
Bob Grodin is the same Bob Grodin who claims to be the world's 
foremost independent photo-interpretation expert. Bob Grodin has NO 
photographic education whatsoever. He has never worked with photography. Bob Grodin has never been a photographic interpreter in his life. 
He has been lying to the public about his credentials for all these years and 
no one even checked; not even Congress checked his credentials when they 
hired him. Do you really think that was an accident? I HAVE A DEGREE 
IN PHOTOGRAPHY.
Bob Grodin is the same Bob Grodin who was hired by the House Select 
Committee on Assassinations in 1976. He is the same Bob Grodin who 
blatantly lied to the committee and told them that the driver, William Greer, 
never took his hands off the wheel. His job is to write books and confuse 
you. His job is to maintain the position that the government lied and that 
there was a conspiracy. His job is also to prevent you from knowing the 
truth about who did kill the President. You cannot welcome the New World 
Order if you have faith in your government. You WILL have faith in your 
government if you learn that Greer killed Kennedy on orders of the Illuminati and that it had nothing to do with the legal, Constitutional 
government. Did you know that the man who was in charge of the Secret 
Service at the time of the assassination became the man in charge of 
security for the Rockefeller family upon his retirement? Well, now you 
know. You should also know that Bob Grodin is a friend of Leslie Watkins, 
and it is Bob Grodin's name that Watkins uses as the alias of the astronaut 
cited in Alternative 003. Did you know that when Ricky White made 
appearances on talk radio across the country to say that his father killed 
Kennedy, that Bob Grodin accompanied him? Did you know that every 
time a caller asked Ricky White a question, Grodin answered for him? Do 
you really believe that is a coincidence? Ricky White's father did not kill 
Kennedy.
For years I have been telling people and audiences about the discrepancies between the doctors' reports in Dallas and the autopsy report 
made at Bethesda Naval Hospital. I have revealed that the wounds were 
tampered with and changed. I have been telling the world that the body 
was removed from its casket aboard the plane and was taken out the galley
Chapter Twelve The Secret Government • 219
door and onto a marine helicopter, and that the body arrived at Bethesda 
Naval Hospital a full 30 minutes before the empty official casket. I have 
stated that the President's brain had disappeared and told why it had 
disappeared.
 All of a sudden David Lifton appeared on radio and TV in 1990 telling 
the world that he had NEW evidence that he had discovered. Every bit of 
his new evidence was exactly what I had been telling people for years. It 
was the same information that I had told Bob Swan in 1972. Lifton showed 
up at my lecture at Beverly Hills High School. After making a scene at the 
box office because he had to pay, Lifton accosted anyone who ventured into 
the lobby, and along with Lars Hansson, attempted to convince them that 
they did not see Greer shoot Kennedy. Legitimate people would never 
have resorted to such disgraceful and discrediting behavior. My testimony 
and the public's outrage after seeing the murder of President Kennedy 
with their own eyes, has seriously damaged the cover-up. The behavior of 
Grodin, Lifton, and Hansson reveals the degree of damage. The public can 
now see without any doubt that they are either part of the cover-up or that 
they are totally incompetent researchers, and in the case of Grodin, a 
bare-faced liar who may have committed treason. 
In the middle of all this, "Hard Copy" TV magazine called me and 
wanted to see the film. I showed them the film and they were shocked, 
excited and wanted an exclusive. I gave it to them but told them that I 
doubted that it would ever get on the air. A date was arranged to film an
 episode for airing, but just before we were scheduled to go on camera an 
NBC executive called the Los Angeles studios of "Hard Copy" and told 
them not to air the film. I tried to find out the name of the executive, but no 
luck. That was the end of that. The producer that had tried to air my story 
and the Kennedy film is no longer with "Hard Copy." Her name is Bubs
Hopper.
I was approached by another producer (don't remember his name)
from "Inside Edition," another TV magazine, who told me that Americans
needed to see the film. I agreed to be on the show but told him the same
thing, that I did not believe it would ever air. A week later I was listening
to David Lifton on a radio talk show. Someone called in and asked David
if he knew who I was and David Lifton said, "I know who he is and we
have a surprise for Mr. Cooper. We are going to put him away for good on
a national TV show. We are going to get a full accounting from that guy."
I had someone call the producer and cancel because he had lied to me.
He pleaded to have me on. I relayed through this intermediary that I
would appear only if I could have editorial control to make sure that he did
not edit the segment to ridicule the film. He refused, and I then knew his
220 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
intention all along had been to discredit me. When the segment aired, Lars 
Hansson was used as a stand-in, in my place. Hansson, the man who had 
been attacking me, stating that Greer had not fired at Kennedy, was now on 
TV stating that Greer killed Kennedy! The reason became obvious, as they 
had Bob Grodin on the next segment. Grodin ridiculed and debunked 
Hansson and the film. They had intended to do a hatchet job on me, but 
when I cancelled they could attack the film only with Hansson taking my 
place. It had every earmark of an agency operation. It didn't work.
I discovered the next ploy when on radio Grodin stated that he would 
soon (finally) release a video of his so-called pristine copy of the Zapruder 
film overexposed to bring out detail in the shadows. Overexposure would 
completely wash out Greer's arm and the gun, which are both in full 
sunlight and have the effect of rendering both invisible to the viewer. 
hope that people are not as stupid as Grodin thinks they are. I will debate 
anyone at any time as long as it's in front of a live audience and nothing is 
edited. I have seen what a film editor can do to make people seem to say 
and do things that were never said or done.
*****
During the United States' initial space exploration and the Moon 
landings every launch was accompanied by alien craft. On November 20, 
1990, Los Angeles TV Channel 2 announced that a separate, red, glowing, 
round-shaped object accompanied the space shuttle Atlantis on its latest 
classified military mission. That was the first public admission.
A Moon base, Luna, was photographed by the Lunar Orbiter and 
filmed by the Apollo astronauts. Domes, spires, tall round structures 
which look like silos, huge T-shaped mining vehicles that left stitchlike 
tracks in the lunar surface, and extremely large as well as small alien craft 
appear in the official NASA photographs. It is a joint United States and 
Soviet base: The space program is a farce and an unbelievable waste of 
money. Alternative 3 is a reality. It is not science fiction.
The Apollo astronauts were severely shaken by this experience, and 
their lives and subsequent statements reflect the depth of the revelation 
and the effect of the muzzle order which followed. They were ordered to 
remain silent or suffer the extreme penalty, death, which was termed an 
"expediency." One astronaut actually did talk to the British producers of 
the TV expos) "Alternative 003." It was aired on the documentary, nonfiction program named "Science Report," confinning many of the allegations.
In the book Alternative 003 the pseudonym "Bob Grodin" was used in 
place of the astronaut's identity. (The real Bob Grodin is a friend of Leslie 
Watkins and is a part of the Kennedy assassination cover-up.) It was also
Chapter Twelve The Secret Government • 221
stated that the astronaut committed suicide in 1978. This cannot be validated by any source, and I believe that several so-called facts in the book 
are really disinformation. I firmly believe that this disinformation is a 
result of pressure put upon the authors and is meant to nullify the effect 
upon the populace of the British TV expose "Alternative 3." 
The headquarters of the international conspiracy is in Geneva, Switzerland. The ruling body is made up of three committees consisting of 
thirteen members each, and all three together comprise the 39 members of 
the executive committee of the body known as the Bilderberg Group. The 
most important and powerful of the three committees is the Policy Committee. (It is more than interesting to note that the United States had 
thirteen original colonies and that 39 delegates from those colonies signed 
the Constitution after it was written and adopted in the first Constitutional 
Convention. Do you believe that is coincidence?) Policy Committee meetings are held on a nuclear submarine beneath the polar icecap. A Soviet 
sub and an American sub join at an airlock and the meeting is convened. 
The secrecy is such that this was the only method which would ensure that 
the meetings could not be bugged. 
I can say that the book Alternative 003 is at least 70% true from my own 
knowledge and the knowledge of my sources. I believe that the disinformation was an attempt to compromise the British TV expos) with information that could be proven false, just as the "Eisenhower Briefing 
Document," which was released here in the United States under the contingency plan Majestic Twelve, can also be proven false. 
Since our interaction with the aliens began we have come into possession of technology beyond our wildest dreams. We currently have, and fly, 
atomic-powered antigravity-type craft in Nevada. Our pilots have made 
interplanetary voyages in these craft and have been to the Moon, Mars, and 
other lanets. We have been lied to about the true nature of the Moon, the 
planets Mars and Venus, and the real state of technology that we possess 
today, at this very moment. 
There are areas on the Moon where plant life grows and even changes 
color with the seasons. This seasonal effect is because the Moon does not, 
as claimed, always present the exact same side to the Earth or the Sun. The 
Moon has several man-made lakes and ponds upon its surface, and clouds 
have been observed and filmed in its atmosphere. It possesses a gravitational field — and man can walk upon its surface without a space suit, 
breathing from an oxygen bottle after undergoing decompression, the 
same as any deep-sea diver! 
I have the official NASA photographs. Some of them were published 
in the books We Discovered Alien Bases on the Moon by Fred Steckling and
222 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
Someone Else Is on the Moon. In 1969 a confrontation broke out between the 
Soviets and Americans at the lunar base. The Soviets attempted to take 
control of the base and held American scientists and personnel hostage. 
We were able to restore order but not before 66 people were killed. The 
Soviets were suspended from the program for a period of two years. A 
reconciliation eventually took place and once again we began to interact.
Today the alliance continues. The Archuleta Mesa underground-base 
confrontation scenario is pure disinformation put out to confuse the issue. 
I knew that a confrontation had taken place but could not remember the 
details. John Lear had convinced me that aliens and Delta forces had 
fought at the Archuleta base. (The New World Order must have an enemy 
from outer space.) Later, when I used regressive hypnosis to improve my 
memory, the true facts emerged. To my knowledge the only hostility 
between aliens and humans was provoked by the U.S. military when they 
were ordered to shoot down UFOs in order to capture technology.
John Lear also says that we invented AIDS in order to kill blood-sucking aliens and that we are only containers for souls. This is hogwash! It is 
a clear vote for the "aliens do not exist" theory.
When the Watergate scandal broke, President Nixon was confident 
that he could not be impeached. Majesty Twelve had a different agenda. 
Nixon was ordered to resign, the intelligence community rightfully concluding that an impeachment trial would open up the files and bare the 
secrets to the public eye. He refused. The first military coup ever to take 
place in the United States was carried out. The Joint Chiefs of Staff sent a 
Top Secret message to the Commanders of all the U.S. armed forces 
throughout the world. It stated, "Upon receipt of this message you will no 
longer carry out any orders from the White House. Acknowledge receipt." 
This message was sent a full five days before Nixon conceded and announced publicly that he would resign.
I saw the message. When I asked my commanding officer what he 
would do, as obviously the order violated the Constitution, I was told: "I 
guess I will wait to see if any orders come from the White House, and then 
I will decide/' I did not see any communication from the White House but 
that does not mean that none was sent. I have confirmation from three 
additional sources, all ex-military, who wrote or called to state that they 
saw the exact same order. These people are Randall Terpstra, ex-Navy; 
David Race, ex-Air Force; and Donald Campbell, ex-Navy. The transcript 
of a taped phone conversation between the author and Mr. Terpstra is 
presented as Chapter 11 of this book, and the signed statements of the 
others can be found in the Appendix.
During all the years that this has been happening the Congress and the
Chapter Twelve The Secret Government • 223
American people have seemed to know instinctively that something was 
not right. When the Watergate scandal surfaced they jumped on the bandwagon and everyone thought that the agencies would be cleaned out. 
President Ford organized the Rockefeller Commission to do the job. His 
real purpose was to head off Congress and keep the cover-up going. 
Nelson Rockefeller, who headed the commission investigating the intelligence community, was a member of the Council on Foreign Relations and 
the one who helped Eisenhower build the Majesty Twelve power structure. 
Rockefeller uncovered only enough to keep the hounds at bay. He threw 
the Congress a few bones and the cover-up rolled merrily along as always.
Later Senator Church would conduct the famous Church hearings. 
He also was a prominent member of the Council on Foreign Relations, and 
he merely repeated the Rockefeller act. Again the cover-up prevailed. 
When the Iran-Contra affair emerged, we thought this time it had to come 
gushing out. Wrong again. Despite mountains of documents pointing to 
drug smuggling and other hidden monsters, the cover-up sailed on. The 
Congress even seemed to go out of its way to duck the real issues. As 
mentioned earlier, one of the most serious facts uncovered is that North 
was involved in preparing a plan to suspend the Constitution of the United 
States of America. When Congressman Jack Brooks of Texas attempted to 
probe the issue he was silenced by the committee chairman. Could it be 
that Congress knows the whole thing and won't touch it? Are they among 
the select who have been picked for the Mars colony when the Earth begins
to destruct, if the Earth is going to destruct?
I cannot even begin to outline the entire financial empire controlled by 
the CIA, the NSA, and the Council on Foreign Relations, which in turn 
control and launder the money from drugs and other intelligence community proprietary ventures; but I can give you a beginning. The amount 
of money is beyond anything you can imagine and is hidden in a vast 
network of banks and holding companies. You should first begin to look at 
the J. Henry Schroder Banking Corporation, the Schroder Trust Company, 
Schroders Ltd. (London), Helbert Wagg Holdings Ltd., J. Henry SchroderWagg & Co. Ltd., Schroder Gerbruder and Company (Germany), Schroder
Munchmeyer Gengst and Company, Castle Bank and its holding companies, the Asian Development Bank, and the Nugan Hand octopus of 
banks and holding companies.
A contingency plan was formulated by Majesty Twelve to throw every
one off the trail should they come close to the truth. The plan was known
as MAJESTIC TWELVE. It was implemented with the release by Moore,
Shandera, and Friedman of the purported Eisenhower Briefing Document.
The document is a fraud, because it is numbered 092447, a number which
224 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
does not exist and will not exist for quite a long time at the present rate. 
Truman wrote Executive orders in the 9000 range; Eisenhower's were in the 
10,000 range; Ford was up to the 11,000 bracket; and Reagan reached only 
into the 12,000s. Executive orders are numbered consecutively, no matter 
who occupies the White House, for reasons of continuity, record keeping, 
and to prevent confusion. This red herring has thrown the entire research 
community off the trail for several years and has resulted in the wasted 
expenditure of money looking for information which does not exist.
The Washington D.C.-based Fund for UFO Research headed by Bruce 
Maccabee has committed what I believe to be criminal fraud in connection 
with the Eisenhower Briefing Document, Stanton Friedman, and the research team of Moore, Shandera, and Friedman. Maccabee solicited funds 
from people, promising to use those funds to investigate Moore's, 
Shandera's, and Friedman's claims and prove the Eisenhower Briefing 
Document to be genuine or fake. Instead he gave the entire $16,000 to 
Stanton Friedman and assigned HIM the task of establishing or destroying 
his own validity. What a snow job! People in the UFO community fell for 
the scam and eagerly awaited Stanton Friedman's findings. Of course, 
Friedman found that the documents were genuine. Just what did people 
think he would find? HE WAS GIVEN $16,000 TO INVESTIGATE HIMSELF! IT IS UNETHICAL. IT IS A CLEAR CONFLICT OF INTEREST. I 
SINCERELY BELIEVE IT TO BE CRIMINAL FRAUD, since money was 
taken in the process. Those who donated money in good faith should 
immediately bring suit against Stanton Friedman, Bruce Maccabee and the 
Fund for UFO Research. This farce resulted in the total waste of $16,000. 
Many thousands of man hours have gone down a rathole. If you doubt the 
secret government's ability to lead you through the rose garden, you had 
better think again.
Another plan is in force. It is the plan to prepare the public for 
eventual confrontation with an alien race. It could also intend to make you 
believe in an alien race that may not exist. The public is being bombarded 
with movies, radio, advertising, and TV programs depicting almost every 
aspect of the purported true nature of an alien presence. This includes the 
good and the bad. Look around and pay attention. Someone is planning 
to make their presence known and the government is preparing you for it. 
They do not want any panic. The unprecedented number of sightings 
worldwide indicates that public exposure is not far off. Never in history 
have there been so many incidents involving UFOs and never in history 
have there been so many official acknowledgments.
For many years the Secret Government has been importing drugs and 
selling them to the people, mainly the poor and minorities. Social welfare
Chapter Twelve The Secret Government • 225
programs were put into place to create a dependent, nonworking element 
in our society. The government then began to remove these programs to 
force people into a criminal class that did not exist in the '50s and '60s.
The government encouraged the manufacture and importation of 
military firearms for the criminals to use. This is intended to foster a 
feeling of insecurity, which would lead the American people to voluntarily 
disarm themselves by passing laws against firearms. Using drugs and 
hypnosis on mental patients in a process called Orion, the CIA inculcated 
the desire in these people to open fire on schoolyards and thus inflame the 
antigun lobby. This plan is well under way, and so far is working perfectly. 
The middle class is begging the government to do away with the 2nd 
amendment.
Author's Note: I have found that these events have indeed happened all over 
the country. In every instance that I have investigated — the incident at the 
women's school in Canada, the shopping center incident in Canada, the Stockton, California, massacre, and the murder of Rabbi Meir Kahane — the 
shooters were all ex-mental patients or were current mental patients who were 
ALL ON THE DRUG PROZAC! This drug, when taken in certain doses, 
increases the serotonin level in the patient, causing extreme violence. Couple 
that with a posthypnotic suggestion or control through an electronic brain 
implant or microwave or E.L.F. intrusion and you get mass murder, ending in 
every case with the suicide of the perpetrator. Exhume the bodies of the 
murderers and check for a brain implant. I think you are going to be surprised. 
In every case the name of the murderer's doctor or mental treatment facility 
has been withheld. I believe we will be able to establish intelligence-community connections and/or connections to known CIA experimental mindcontrol programs when we finally discover who these doctors of death really
are.
Due to the wave of crime sweeping the nation, the media will convince
the American people that a state of anarchy exists within the major cities.
They are now building their case almost nightly on TV and daily in the
newspapers. When public opinion has been won to this idea, they intend
to state that a terrorist group armed with a nuclear weapon has entered the
United States and that they plan to detonate this device in one of our cities.
(This is now being set up by the crisis in the Middle East.) The Government
will then suspend the Constitution and declare martial law. The secret
alien army of implanted humans and all dissidents, which translates into
anyone they choose, will be rounded up and placed in the one-mile-square
concentration camps which already exist. Are the people whom they intend to place in these concentration camps destined to make up the
reported "batch consignments" of slave labor needed by the space
colonies?
The media — radio, TV, newspapers, and computer networks — will
226 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
be nationalized and seized. Anyone who resists will be taken or killed. 
This entire operation was rehearsed by the government and military in 
1984 under the code name REX-84A and it went off without a hitch. When 
these events have transpired, the SECRET GOVERNMENT and/or ALIEN 
takeover will be complete. Your freedom will never be returned and you 
will live in slavery for the remainder of your life. You had better wake up 
and you had better do it now!
Philip Klass is an agent of the CIA. This was stated in the documents 
I saw between 1970 and 1973. One of his jobs as an aviation expert was to 
debunk everything to do with UFOs. All military commanders were instructed to call him to gain information on how to debunk and/or explain 
UFO contacts and/or sightings to the public and/or the press if and when 
the need arose. Some people seem to love Klass. They encourage him and 
heap large doses of attention upon him. He is invited to speak at UFO 
events and is quoted in papers, books, and newspapers as being the expert 
on "what really happened."
Philip Klass is not operating in our best interest. His debunkings and 
explanations of UFO sightings are so full of holes that a six-year-old child 
should be able to discern his true purpose. I have seen poor misled people 
actually ask Klass for his autograph, an act similar in magnitude to Elliot 
Ness asking Al Capone for his autograph. I have found that in many 
instances the secret elect are absolutely right when they state that "people 
who will not use their intelligence are no better than animals who do not 
have intelligence. Such people are beasts of burden and steaks on the table 
by choice and consent." (Quote from "Silent Weapons for Quiet Wars" in 
Chapter Two). We get exactly what we deserve in most instances.
William Moore, Jaimie Shandera, and Stanton Friedman are witting 
(with full knowledge, understanding, and consent) agents of the Secret 
Government. William Moore's reported use of a Defense Investigative 
Service ID card and his reported self-confession to Lee Graham that he is an 
agent of the government confirmed it. (Lee Graham phoned me at my 
home, and when asked, confirmed that Moore had indeed shown him a 
Defense Investigative Service ID.) Moore's later confession proved it without any doubt.
Author's Note: On July 1,1989, the night before I presented this paper at the 
MUFON symposium in Las Vegas, William Moore admitted that he was a 
government agent, that he had released disinformation to researchers, that 
had falsified documents, that he had spied upon researchers and reported 
information concerning those researchers to the intelligence community, that 
he had helped in a counterintelligence operation against Paul Bennewicz that 
resulted in Mr. Bennewicz's commitment to a mental institution, and that he 
had done all this with full knowledge of what he was doing. He is either a
Chapter Twelve The Secret Government • 227
traitor or a stone-hearted manipulator at best.
Some of the self-appointed "ufologists" still look up to Moore, and still 
cite his research in their correspondence, papers, and books. This reflects a 
degree of ignorance and stupidity in the UFO community. Bruce Maccabee 
wrote a letter to Caveat Emptor citing articles from William Moore's publication, Focus, as proof that I am discredited. Dream on. It is no mystery to 
me why mainstream America calls ufologists whackos, loonies, and nuts. 
In some cases they are.
Jaime Shandera is the man responsible for my loss of employment as 
the Executive Director of National Technical College. Shortly after going 
public, Shandera showed up at the college wearing a brown suit and 
carrying a briefcase. He ignored the receptionist's attempts to help him. 
She informed me that a man had walked into the college and appeared to 
ne inspecting the building and classrooms. I found Mr. Shandera peering 
into the word-processing classroom. I asked him if I could be of any help. 
He said no and ignored me. I explained that I was the Executive Director 
and again asked if I could be of any help. Again he said no but gave me 
some very hard stares and appeared to have been taken off guard. He 
seemed to be extremely nervous and immediately left the building. I 
followed him out the door, and a man across the street snapped my picture 
with a 35mm camera. I watched as Jaime Shandera walked to his car, took 
one last look at me and then drove away. A few days later he repeated the
act, only this time he told me that he had seen an ad that the college was for 
sale and he was looking over the property. I saw him again, coming out of 
the corporate offices. When he saw me he again became extremely nervous
and hurried to his car, took off his jacket before getting in and then drove 
off. A few minutes later I was called to the President's office and told that 
the college could not use anyone who could jeopardize the status of
government assistance by getting involved with flying saucers. I knew
wthat had happened and tendered my resignation effective April 15,1989. 
I had no intention of stopping my activities and I did not wish to hurt the 
college or the students who depended so much on government aid programs. All this time Shandera thought he had pulled it off anonymously, 
but I and several others have always known that it was he. Now you know. 
Jaime Shandera was positively identified by me, the Security Department Head, and the receptionist. Later I obtained another positive identification from the Vice President in charge of Admissions. John Lear was 
at that time the only person who knew the name and address of my place 
of employment. I later found out by body-proportion comparison analysis 
and voice-print analysis that John Lear is the agent dubbed "Condor" on 
the CIA-backed TV production of "UFO Cover-up Live." As Condor, he is
228 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
in reality a government agent who has been working with Moore, 
Shandera, Friedman, John Grace, Bob Lazar, and others all along. They are 
CIA all the way.
Stanton Friedman has told me and others that years ago he "helped 
develop a nuclear reactor to power an aircraft that was the size of a 
basketball, was clean, turned out hydrogen, and worked like a dream" (his 
words, not mine). Several others have written me to say that they also were 
told the same thing by Mr. Friedman. Roger Scherrer is one who remembers Stanton relating to him this same story. The only fuel which could go 
into such an engine and produce hydrogen as a byproduct is water, and 
that is precisely what at least one type of alien craft uses — nuclear energy 
and water, according to the documentation I read while in Naval Intelligence. Is he really unwitting? I seriously doubt it. He was a member of 
the Moore, Shandera, and Friedman research team, and it was they who 
implemented the MAJESTIC TWELVE contingency plan.
In documents that I read between 1970 and 1973, the names of individuals were listed who had been targeted for recruitment. These documents stated that these people were to be coerced, using patriotism as a 
motivating force whenever possible. If necessary, financial assistance 
would be provided through employment with a proprietary front company or through grants. This is, coincidentally, the method by which 
Friedman got his $16,000 from another agent, Bruce Maccabee. We have 
also found that Moore has received money for research from at least two 
CIA front companies. This has been confirmed by the research of Grant 
Cameron. Others named on the list were cited as active intelligence-agency assets. When I first presented this paper I gave only a partial list of those 
named in the Naval Intelligence documents. Following are as many names 
as I can remember. (There may be more, but these are all that I can recall at 
this time.)
Stanton Friedman, CIA; John Lear, CIA (Lear's father was named as 
having participated in antigravity research); William Moore; John Keel; 
Charles Berlitz; Bruce Maccabee, ONI (Office of Naval Intelligence); Linda 
Moulton Howe; Philip Klass, CIA; James Moseley, CIA (Moseley's father 
was discussed in a very complimentary manner); Virgil Armstrong, CIA 
(listed as Postlethwaite); Wendelle Stevens, CIA; Dr. J. Allen Hynek, CIA.
That is the list as I remember it. There may have been others, but I 
cannot recall. I know of other agents who were not on the list. You must 
remember that when I first wrote this paper I thought that Bruce Maccabee 
might not have been recruited, but then later he proved me wrong when he 
gave Stanton Friedman $16,000 to investigate himself.
There was a two-word code that these people were to use to identify
Chapter Twelve The Secret Government • 229
each other. The first word was a color and the second word was a bird. The 
code was "Gold Eagle." When Stanton Friedman first contacted me he 
used the code. I pretended ignorance but he asked me several times if I had 
ever seen or heard of Gold Eagle. John Lear also asked me if I had ever 
heard of Gold Eagle. He too was testing me. They knew that I had access 
to correct information and were attempting to determine if I were one of 
them. As George Bush would say, "Read my lips." I was never one of you. 
I will never be one of you.
When I talked to Stan Deyo in Australia by phone, he told me the code 
given to him was "Blue Falcon." Stan was a victim of mind-control experimentation while a cadet at the Air Force Academy. He and over 80 
other cadet mind-control subjects resigned from the academy in protest. 
He has been on a crusade to discover the truth ever since. Stan has written 
two excellent books, The Cosmic Conspiracy, and The Vindicator Scrolls. I 
recommend you read them both.
I think that Linda Moulton Howe may be innocent of witting involvement. Linda in particular seems to have exercised extreme care in what she 
has presented to the public. Her research is excellent. I was impressed 
when she confided to me that Sgt. Richard Doty of the Counterintelligence 
Division of the Air Force Office of Special Investigations had taken her into 
the Intelligence office at Kirtland Air Force Base in New Mexico and 
showed her the exact same documents that I had seen while in the Navy. 
She even saw the same information on the Kennedy assassination naming 
Greer as the assassin. Ms. Howe is also the only person in the world 
outside of the intelligence community who knows the truth as I know it 
regarding Operation MAJORITY. She has exercised good judgment and 
great restraint in not revealing the contents of those documents to the 
public. It is for this reason that I believe that an attempt has been made to 
use her. Fortunately, Linda did not fall off a turnip truck and she didn't 
play the game. I recommend you read her book entitled Alien Harvest. You 
should be able to order it from any good bookstore.
I have discovered that Whitley Strieber is a CIA asset, as is Budd 
Hopkins. Strieber's book Majestic has convicted him with those of us in the 
know. It is the true story of the Roswell crash taken from the confiscated 
diaries of James Forrestal. That is, assuming that the documents that I saw 
in the Navy were not a hoax. I do not believe that they were. The names of 
people and names of projects and operations have been changed in 
Strieber's book, but other than that the information and documentation is 
true. The autopsy reports are exactly the same that I saw in Project 
GRUDGE 18 years ago.
I have recently come into possession of an affidavit that is signed,
230 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
notarized, and sworn under penalty of perjury from an M.D. in New York 
stating that the M.D. was recruited by a CIA agent named Budd Hopkins 
to help work with abductees for the CIA. The affidavit is included in the 
Appendix. I knew that Hopkins was not right when I met him in Modesto. 
He could not look me in the eyes, and anyone who cannot look me in the 
eyes is not right. He spent the whole time, including his speech, trying to 
convince people of the innocence of the abductee experience and the absence of the aliens' malevolence, which was a total crock. It was an insult 
to anyone who had investigated abductees.
I know that all of the major UFO research organizations were targeted 
for infiltration and control by the Secret Government, just as NICAP was 
infiltrated and controlled. In fact, NICAP was eventually destroyed from 
within. I know that these efforts have been successful.
MUFON is a great example. Hundreds of members all over the world 
conduct investigations and send in physical evidence to MUFON headquarters, where it quickly disappears. Everyone screams for physical 
evidence as proof. Recently samples were collected of a liquid that had 
dripped from a saucer onto a schoolyard in Gulf Breeze, Florida. The 
samples were sent to MUFON, where they immediately vanished. Walt 
Andrus has stated that it was an accident. BALONEY! This is not the first 
time MUFON has "lost" evidence. I consider MUFON the great black hole 
of the UFO community. The control of information is so tight that nothing 
escapes. Anyone who tells it like it really is, is debunked and barred from 
symposiums. The members are told what to believe and what not to 
believe. The members do not seem to know that they are being controlled. 
The members of the MUFON board of directors and the members of the 
advisory board of consultants are for the most part supported by the 
Government in the form of salaries, grants, or retirement checks. Who can 
believe that this does not constitute a conflict of interest? Who can investigate and expose the hand that feeds them? How can you possibly believe 
the Government could not control the people to whom it funnels money? 
MONEY IS THE BASIC METHOD OF CONTROL.
The major UFO publications are without any doubt controlled and are 
most probably, as in the case with UFO, financially backed or controlled by 
the CIA. Vicki Cooper (no relation), the editor and publisher of UFO, has 
been telling friends and relatives for at least two years that the CIA is 
pushing her magazine. Ron Regehr and Lee Graham remember the summer of 1988 when Vicki interviewed them at Mr. Graham's residence in 
Huntington Beach. After the interview was over Vicki Cooper walked to 
her car, turned, and mysteriously yelled, "You know, my magazine might 
be financed by the CIA."
Chapter Twelve The Secret Government • 231
I have talked to friends and acquaintances of Ms. Cooper who swear 
that she has stated on many occasions that "the CIA controls UFO magazine." Vicki Cooper's uncle, Grant Cooper, was Sirhan Sirhan's defense 
attorney, who made no attempt to defend his client. It was important to the 
Secret Government and the CIA that Sirhan be pinned as a "lone assassin." 
Grant Cooper has extensive ties to the CIA and the Johnny Rosselli mob.
We have found that Vicki's son attends the West Point Military Academy. What a wonderful way to control a magazine! "You don't play ball, 
your son won't graduate." I found out that the person who found Vicki 
Cooper an apartment when she arrived in Los Angeles was Barry Taff, a 
long-time employee of the intelligence agencies (yes, plural) and a longtime proteg) of Dr. John Lilly and Dr. J. West, the government's premiere 
experts in mind control. These men have been involved in the most terrifying, experimentation ever directed at total control of individuals. I believe 
that it is no innocent coincidence that Taff's apartment is directly above 
Vicki's. All of this was confirmed independently in a letter written by Mr. 
Martin Cannon, a Los Angeles-based researcher. The letter can be found in 
the Appendix.
The most damning evidence for the control of UFO magazine and 
Vicki Cooper comes from Don Ecker. At the 1989 MUFON Conference Don 
Ecker became so uninhibited that he managed to relate the following story 
to me and two others.
According to Don Ecker, Vicki Cooper used to work for the infamous
Mayflower Madam. The Feds were trying to get the Madam and discovered Vicki. Ms. Cooper was busted and threatened with spending the
rest of her life in prison if she did not cooperate. Vicki rolled over, according, to Ecker, and ratted on her employer. Since Vicki had apparently had
something to do with the bookkeeping operation, she became a key witness. The Mayflower Madam was put out of business and into jail, thanks
to Ms. Cooper's testimony. That is, if Don Ecker was telling the truth. We
have no reason to believe that he was lying. I don't know why Don told us.
Maybe he doesn't like Vickie. Or maybe he, like Lear and Friedman,
thought I was one of them. (If 11 be a cold day in hell.)
According to Ecker, Vicki Cooper was told to get out of town and stay
out. She was given money and told to start UFO magazine in Los Angeles.
She was told that she was to print information that would be fed to her.
Sure enough, you read in UFO purported leaked government UFO information, always written by someone who cannot be contacted. It is always
under an alias; no one can check the information. Vicki is adamant about
printing only the news and information that she considers best for the
readers, as if they have no mind of their own. She indulges in character
232 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
assassination.
Don Ecker claims to have been a member of Army Intelligence, the 
Green Berets, and later a police officer in Boise, Idaho. Don claims a total 
of ten years experience as a criminal investigator. The Boise Police Department, when asked by phone, has denied any knowledge of Mr. Ecker. I 
have requested that Don furnish a copy of his Army record, but he has 
refused. Ecker calls himself a UFO expert and has dubbed himself (yep, 
you guessed it) a "ufologist." He sprinkles terms like "ufological" around 
in his articles, and not even Don knows what the hell it means. He confirms most of the information that I have divulged when he speaks to 
groups. He has furnished data bases with a plethora of files that confirm 
everything that I have ever said. Ecker probably made them up himself, 
since they are all anonymous. He claims that aliens mutilate humans like 
cattle. Don Ecker, like Vicki Cooper, practices character assassination.
According to legitimate law-enforcement sources, Ecker is lying to the 
public. He was a guard at the Idaho State Prison from September 1981 to 
September 1982 when he quit to become a Canyon County Sheriff's 
Department Narcotics Deputy Trainee. Donald Francis Ecker II was fired 
after only six weeks for "improper conduct." Mr. Ecker returned to the 
Idaho State Prison where he was employed as a guard until July 1987 when 
he shot off his left leg with a shotgun during a training exercise. Sources 
also reveal that Donald Francis Ecker II is a fugitive from justice. Authorities in Idaho hold several outstanding warrants for the arrest of Mr. Ecker.
You must understand that the government is not ever going to allow 
any person or any group of persons to uncover the most highly classified 
secret in the world — if they can help it. They will always have agents 
controlling UFO groups, publications and information. If aliens are not 
real and the whole thing turns out to be the greatest hoax ever perpetrated, 
just who do you think did the perpetrating?
If the underground history is correct, aliens have manipulated and/or 
ruled the human race through various secret societies, religions, magic, 
witchcraft, and the occult. The Council on Foreign Relations and the Trilateral Commission are in complete control of the alien technology and are 
also in complete control of the nation's economy. Eisenhower was the last 
President to know the entire overview of the alien problem. Succeeding 
Presidents were told only what Majesty Twelve and the intelligence community wanted them to know. Believe me, it was not the truth.
Majesty Twelve has presented most new Presidents with a picture of a 
lost alien culture seeking to renew itself, build a home on this planet, and 
shower us with gifts of technology. In some cases the President was told 
nothing. Each President in turn has swallowed the story (or no story at all)
Chapter Twelve The Secret Government • 233
hook, line and sinker. Meanwhile innocent people continue to suffer at the 
hands of the alien and human scientists. I have been unable to determine 
exactly what it is they are doing. Many people are abducted and are 
sentenced to live with psychological and physical damage for the rest of 
their lives. Could this really be a CIA mind-control operation?
In the documents that I read, 1 in 40 humans had been implanted with 
devices, the purpose of which I have never discovered. The Government 
believes that the aliens are building an army of implanted humans who can 
ne activated and turned upon us at will. You should also know that to date 
we have not even begun to come close to parity with the aliens.
I sent 536 copies of a "Petition to Indict" to every member of the Senate 
and House of Representatives on April 26,1989. As of this date, November 
23,1990, I have received a total of only six replies, only four more than I had 
received in May 1989.
THE CONCLUSIONS ARE INESCAPABLE:
(1) The secret power structure may believe that by our own ignorance 
or by divine decree, planet Earth will self-destruct sometime in the near 
future. These men sincerely believe that they are doing the right thing in 
their attempt to save the human race. It is terribly ironic that they have 
been forced to take as their partner an alien race which is itself engaged in 
a monumental struggle for survival. Many moral and legal compromises 
may have been made in this joint effort. These compromises were made in
error and must be corrected. Those responsible should be brought to 
account for their actions. I can understand the fear and urgency that must 
have been instrumental in the decision not to tell the public. Obviously I 
disagree with that decision.
Throughout history small but powerful groups of men have consistently felt that they alone were capable of deciding the fates of millions.
Throughout history they have been wrong. This great Nation owes its very
existence to the principles of Freedom and Democracy. I believe with all
my heart that the United States of America cannot and will not succeed in
any effort that ignores those principles. Full disclosure to the public should
be made and we should proceed to save the human race together.
(2) We are being manipulated by a joint human/alien power structure which will result in a one-world government and the partial enslavement of the human race. This has been deemed necessary to solve the 
elemental question: "Who will speak for planet Earth?" It has been 
decided that man is not mature enough in his evolutionary development to 
be trusted to interact properly with an alien race. We already have enough 
trouble between the different human races, so what would happen if a
234 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
totally alien extraterrestrial race was introduced? Would they be lynched, 
spit upon, or shot? Would discrimination result in nasty encounters that 
would doom humanity as a result of the alien's obviously superior technology? Have our leaders decided to lock us in the playpen? The only way to 
prevent this scenario from taking place is to cause an evolutionary leap in 
consciousness, a paradigm shift for the entire human race. I have no idea 
how it can be done, but I know that it desperately needs to be done. It 
needs to be done very quickly and very quietly.
(3) The government has been totally deceived and we are being 
manipulated by an alien power, which will result in the total enslavement 
and/or destruction of the human race. We must use any and every means 
available to prevent this from happening. 
(4) If none of the above are true, something else may be happening 
which is beyond our ability to understand at this moment. We must force 
disclosure of all of the facts, discover the truth, and act upon it. The 
situation in which we find ourselves is due to our own actions or inactions 
over the last 44 years. Because it is our own fault, we are the only ones who 
can change future events. Education seems to me to be a major part of the 
solution. The remaining part is the abolition of secrecy. 
(5) There is always the possibility that I was used, that the whole 
alien scenario is the greatest hoax in history designed to create an alien 
enemy from outer space in order to expedite the formation of a one-world 
government. I have found evidence that this could be true. I have included that evidence in the Appendix. I advise you to consider this scenario as being probable. 
Through ignorance or misplaced trust we as a people have abdicated 
our role as the watchdog of our government. Our government was 
founded "of the people, for the people, by the people." There was no 
mention or intent ever to abdicate our role and place our total trust in a 
handful of men who meet secretly to decide our fate. In fact, the structure 
of our government was designed to prevent that from ever happening. It 
we had done our jobs as Citizens we would never have reached this point 
Most of us are completely ignorant as to even the most basic functions of 
our government. We have truly become a nation of sheep — and sheep are 
always eventually led to slaughter. It is time to stand up in the manner of 
our forefathers and walk like men. I remind you that the Jews of Europe 
marched obediently to the ovens after having been warned, believing all 
the while that the facts could not possibly be true. When the outside world 
was told of the holocaust occurring in Hitler's Europe, it was not believed 
at first.
You must understand that, real or not, the purported presence of
Chapter Twelve The Secret Government • 235
aliens have been used to neutralize certain widely different segments of the
population: "Don't worry, the benevolent space brothers will save you." It 
can also be used to fill the need for an extraterrestrial threat to justify the 
formation of a New World Order: "The aliens are eating us." The most 
important information that you need to determine your future actions is 
that this New World Order calls for the destruction of the sovereignty of
nations, including the United States. The New World Order cannot, and 
will not, allow our Constitution to continue to exist. The New World Order 
will be a totalitarian socialist system. We will be slaves shackled to a 
cashless system of economic control.
If the documentation that I viewed while I was in Naval Intelligence is 
true, then what you have just read is probably closer to the truth than 
anything ever written. If extraterrestrials are a hoax, then what you just 
read is exactly what the Illuminati wants you to believe. I can assure you 
beyond any shadow of a doubt that even if aliens are not real, the technology IS REAL. Antigravity craft exist and human pilots fly them. I and 
millions of others have seen them. They are metal; they are machines; they
 come in different shapes and sizes; and they are obviously intelligently 
guided. 
If suddenly there was a threat to this world from some other species 
from another planet, we'd forget all the little local differences that we have 
between our two countries and we would find out once and for all that we 
really are all human beings on this Earth. 
Ronald Reagan 
to Mikhail Gorbachev
236 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
SOURCES
Andrews, George C, Extra-Terrestrials Among Us, Llewellyn Publications, St. 
Paul, Minnesota.
Bamford, James, The Puzzle Palace, Houghton Mifflin, Boston.
Borklund, C. W., The Department of Defense, Frederick A. Praeger, New York.
Collier, Peter and David Horowitz, Rockefellers: An American Dynasty, Holt. 
Rinehart and Winston, New York.
Cooper, Vicki and Sherie Stark, eds., UFO (magazine — several issues since 
Spring 1988), Los Angeles, California.
Cooper, William, "Operation Majority, Final Release/ Fullerton, California.
Corson, William R., The Armies of Ignorance, The Dial Press/James Wade, New 
York.
Curry, Richard O., ed., Freedom at Risk, Temple University Press, Philadelphia.
Deyo, Stan, The Cosmic Conspiracy and The Vindictor Scrolls, West Australian 
Texas Trading, Perth, Australia.
English, Bill, "Report on Grudge/Blue Book #13," John A. Lear, Las Vegas 
Nevada.
Friend, Lt. Col. and Dr. J. Allen Hynek, "GRUDGE/Blue Book Report #13" 
(Top Secret). Last seen at the headquarters of the Commander in Chief 
of the Pacific Fleet (CINCPACFLT), Hawaii.
Graubard, Stephen, Kissinger, Portrait of a Mind, W.W. Norton & Co., New 
York.
Gulley, Bill with Mary Ellen Reese, Breaking Cover, Simon & Schuster, New 
York.
Hawking, Stephen W., A Brief History of Time: From the Big Bang to Black Holes, 
Bantam Books, New York.
Isaacson, Walter and Evan Thomas, The Wise Men, Simon & Schuster, New 
York.
Kissinger, Henry, Nuclear Weapons and Foreign Policy, Harper & Brothers, New 
York.
Kwitny, Jonathan, The Crimes of Patriots, W.W. Norton & Co., New York.
Chapter Twelve The Secret Government • 237
Lear, John A., "The John Lear Hypothesis," Las Vegas, Nevada. Partially true; 
the rest is disinformation.
Lear, John A. and John Grace, "The Krill Papers Hoax."
Ledeen, Michael A., Perilous Statecraft, Charles Scribner & Sons, New York.
"MAJIC/Operation Majority" (Top Secret). Presidential briefing document 
by Majesty Twelve. Last seen at the headquarters of the Commander in 
Chief of the Pacific Fleet (CINCPACFLT), Hawaii.
Mickus, Tom, 'The Larry Fenwick Interview," Canada.
Moscow, Alvin, The Rockefeller Inheritance, Doubleday & Co., New York.
"Operation MAJESTIC TWELVE," Eisenhower Briefing Document. Author 
unknown, released by the research team of Moore, Shandera, and Friedman.
Pea Research, Government Involvement in the UFO Cover-up: Chronology, Pea 
Research, California.
Ranelagh, John, The Agency: The Rise and Decline of the CIA, Simon & Schuster, 
New York.
Schulzinger, Robert D., The Wise Men of Foreign Affairs, Columbia University 
Press, New York.
Shoup, Laurence H. and William Minter, Imperial Brain Trust: The Council on 
Foreign Relations & United States Foreign Policy, Monthly Review Press, 
New York.
 Steckling, Fred, We Discovered Alien Bases on the Moon, G.A.F. International, 
California. 
Steiger, Brad, The UFO Abductors, Berkley Books, New York, 
Stienman, William, The Crash at Aztec, William Stienman, La Mirada, California, 
Strieber, Whitley, Communion and Majestic, Avon, New York.
Valerian, Valdamar, The Matrix, Arcturus Book Service, Stone Mountain, 
Georgia.



Chapter 13 Treason in High Places

Chapter 13
TREASON IN HIGH 
PLACES
The United Nations Treaty
and
The United Nations Participation Act
vs.
The Sovereignty of the United States of America■
At the conclusion of the Constitutional Convention
in September 1787, Benjamin Franklin was asked,
"What have you wrought?"
He answered,
"...a Republic, if you can keep it."
240 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
The United States Constitution 
Article VI
All Debts contracted and Engagements entered into, before the Adoption of this Constitution, shall be as valid against the United States under 
this Constitution, as under the Confederation.
This Constitution, and the Laws of the United States which shall be 
made in Pursuance thereof; and all Treaties made, or which shall be made, 
under the Authority of the United States, shall be the supreme Law of the 
Land; and the Judges in every State shall be bound thereby, any Thing in 
the Constitution or Laws of any State to the Contrary notwithstanding.
The Senators and Representatives before mentioned, and the Members of the several State Legislatures, and all executive and judicial Officers, 
both of the United States and of the several States, shall be bound by Oath 
or Affirmation, to support this Constitution; but no religious Test shall ever 
be required as a Qualification to any Office or public Trust under the 
United States.
HAVE WE ALREADY JOINED A ONE-WORLD 
GOVERNMENT?
U.S. Sovereignty — Fact or Fiction?
The Executive, Judicial and Legislative Branches of the U.S. Government have followed the policy that the United Nations Treaty approved 
under the U.N. Participation Act of 1945 in behalf of the United States of 
America by Harry S. Truman and the United States Senate, which treaty 
supersedes the United States Constitution under the terms of Article VI of 
the United States Constitution.
The Council of Foreign Relations created the United Nations. Their 
member agents, Alger Hiss and Leo Pasvolsky did the paperwork, but the 
honors went to a special committee appointed by President Roosevelt to 
draw the first draft of the Charter.
The members of the Committee were: Sumner Wells, Isaiah Bowman, 
Hamilton Fish Armstrong, Benjamin Cohen, and Clark Eichelberger — all 
members of the Council on Foreign Relations and members of a secret 
Order of the Quest called the JASON Society.
The Charter was rushed through the U.S. Senate without printed 
copies to guide the Senators: it was EXPLAINED to them by Russian-born 
revolutionary Leo Pasvolsky.
The Charter conferred no real power on the General Assembly; all the 
power was in the Security Council where the VETO was. The Senate
Chapter Thirteen Treason in High Places • 241
would not have ratified the Charter except that the American delegation 
had a right to VETO if our interests were threatened by action of other 
members.
Included in this Charter was and is ARTICLE 25: "Member nations 
agree to ACCEPT and CARRY OUT the decisions of the Security Council in 
accordance with the PRESENT CHARTER/'
No restrictions, no reservations. This is ALL of Article 25. Note the 
word "present," indicating that there might be OTHER charters. The 
VETO was a hindrance to World Government — it had to be circumvented.
In 1950 the General Assembly, without any legal authority, met and 
adopted what they named the "UNITING FOR PEACE" RESOLUTION. 
This, greatly expanded since that time, permitted THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY to EXERCISE THE POWERS OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL. I 
bet you didn't know that. The Government of the United States recognizes 
the illegally amended Charter as the "law of the world," overriding our 
Constitution. The General Assembly has for years been making the law of 
the world by RATIFYING RESOLUTIONS BY A 2/3 MAJORITY VOTE. 
When the Resolution is ratified it is sent down to the CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OF THE MEMBER STATE and the EXECUTIVE IS OBLIGED TO ACCEPT 
AND CARRY OUT the provisions in the resolution.
The governments concerned must IGNORE, ABOLISH, REVISE AND 
RESCIND LAWS in their territories which conflict with the resolutions of 
the General Assembly, and to PASS OTHER LAWS WHICH WILL PUT 
THESE RESOLUTIONS INTO FORCE. "One man, one vote" comes 
through Resolution No. 1760.
There are more than 2000 of these resolutions now in effect. THEY 
ARE THE LAW OF THE LAND. Our civil rights laws (the ex-post facto 
sections of which come from the Nuremberg Resolutions), our agricultural 
laws, our health and welfare laws, our labor laws, our foreign aid laws —
all come from resolutions of the General Assembly or treaties of the U.N. 
ratified by our Senate.
Any law passed in your state will be rescinded or abolished if it is in 
conflict with resolutions of the General Assembly.
I can tell you, with no reservations whatsoever, that all of the intelligence organizations of the United States work directly for the United 
Nations in concert with the Secret Government toward the sole purpose of 
the destruction of the sovereignty of the United States of America and the
bringing about of the one-world government. The authority cited for their
efforts is ARTICLE VI of the Constitution, the United Nations Treaty, and 
the U.N. Participation Act of 1949 signed by Harry S. Truman with the 
advice and consent of the U.S. Senate.
242 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
This should help you understand how our laws are being made and 
who is making them! ASK YOUR SENATORS, CONGRESSMEN AND 
STATE LEGISLATORS IF THEY ARE AWARE OF THESE FACTS.
The following statement was made by Mr. Carl B. Rix of Milwaukee, 
former president of the American Bar Association, before a Senate subcommittee which was hearing testimony on the proposed Bricker Amendment. 
It was entered into the House Record by Hon. Lawrence H. Smith, Wisconsin, on May 11,1955.
CONGRESSIONAL RECORD (page A3220)
Statement of Carl B. Rix, Milwaukee, Wisconsin:
I appear in favor of the amendments.
Congress is no longer bound by its constitutional system of delegated 
powers. Its only test is under the obligatory power to promote human 
rights in these fields of endeavor: Civil, political, economic, social and 
cultural. These are found in Articles 55 and 56 of the Charter of the United 
Nations, a ratified and approved treaty. They are being promoted in all 
parts of the world by the United Nations.
Congress may now legislate as an uninhibited body with no shackles 
of delegated powers under the Constitution. Our entire system of a 
government of delegated powers of Congress has been changed to a systern of undelegated powers without amendment by the people of the 
United States.
The authority for these statements is found in a volume entitled Constitution of the United States of America, Annotated, issued in 1953, prepared 
under the direction of the Judiciary Committee of the Senate of the United 
States and under the chairmanship of Prof. Edward S. Corwin of Princeton, 
aided by the legal staff of the Library of Congress. This is the conclusion on 
page 427 of the Annotations: "In a word, the treaty power cannot purport 
to amend the Constitution by adding to the list of Congress' enumerated 
powers, but having acted, the consequence will often be that it has 
provided Congress with an opportunity to enact measures which, independently of a treaty, Congress could not pass, and the only question that 
can be raised as to such measures will be whether they are 'necessary and 
proper' measures for the carrying of the treaty in question into operation."
It will be noted that one of the principal cases cited is that of the 
Migratory Bird case.
These conclusions are those also of a committee of the New York State 
Bar Association, of which former Attorney General Mitchell and Mr. John 
W. Davis were prominent members.
Now, for some practical illustration of new-found powers under
Chapter Thirteen Treason in High Places • 243
treaties of what Congress may do:
1. It may enact a comprehensive education bill, providing for education in any State which does not provide it. In fact, it may take over all 
public education now provided by States and municipalities. 
2. It may enact a prohibition act without an amendment of the Constitution. 
3. It may enact a uniform divorce act. 
4. It may take over all social and welfare services rendered by or 
through the States or their agencies. 
5. It may take over all commerce, all utility rates and service, all labor. 
The list may be multiplied extensively at your will. 
The new test of constitutionality will apply to all legislation by Congress since 1945, which deals with any of the five fields of endeavor. Any 
judge deciding on the validity of legislation must have two books before 
him — one, the Constitution of the United States, and the other, the Charter 
of the United Nations. If he does not find authority for the act in the 
Constitution, he will find it in the Charter. That is the exact situation in 
which Justice Holmes found himself and the other members of the 
Supreme Court when they decided the Migratory Bird case. The authority 
was not found in the Constitution — it was found in the treaty with Great 
Britain.
The question to be answered is this: Under which form of government 
do the people of the United States prefer to live? Manifestly, we cannot 
operate under both.
Senators, the people of the United States have given up their sons; they 
have given up billions of their substance. They should not be the only 
Nation in the world to give up their form of government — the wonder of 
the world — to discharge their obligations to the people of the world.
THE BRICKER AMENDMENT, WHICH WOULD HAVE CHANGED THIS, 
WAS NOT PASSED.
A LETTER TO THE EDITOR
Borger, Texas News Herald 
Sunday, November 11,1962 
Dear Mr. Newby:
Replying to your letter Oct. 12th, also CHALLENGE for November,
1961: quoting Patrick Henry on treaties. In the first place Patrick Henry
was and is NO AUTHORITY on either treaties or the Constitution, and he
opposed it, IF it is too late to do anything about reinstating our Constitu-
244 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
tion, then why not just accept the traitorous U.N. Charter-Treaty without 
more ado? Why didn't the American Revolutionists think it too late or too 
difficult to defend their Liberty? And IF the highly-intelligent framers of 
the Constitution "were well aware of the deathtrap incorporated in ARTICLE VI," why then did they so frame it? Did they not expect PATRIOTS, 
rather than Treasonists as our elected officials, to HONOR AND ENFORCE 
the spirit, letter, and intent of the Constitution?
I note you say that according to a law dictionary, the terms "legal" and 
"lawful" are almost one and the same. Agreed! "Almost," but not quite. I 
believe there is a fine point of difference. Taking us into the U.N. may 
SEEM to have been done legally (by the President and Senate), but the act 
is still unlawful, because it is unconstitutional, and the CONSTITUTION IS 
THE SUPREME LAW OF THE LAND. All renowned and genuine Constitutional experts (such as Thos. M. Cooley, Thos. Jas. Norton, and Harry 
Atwood, to name several) have always held that anything which contravenes, diminishes, or perverts the Constitution is null and void and of 
no effect.
Neither the President or Senate has authority or power to change, 
diminish, or destroy the Constitution "by usurpation," treaty, or otherwise: 
only a Constitutional Amendment can lawfully change it.
The Constitution is a contract that WE THE PEOPLE of the USA made 
with one another, which sets up the machinery of government to carry out 
this contract —mainly for the purpose of PROTECTING INDIVIDUAL 
RIGHTS as well as STATE RIGHTS, AGAINST THE POWERS OF 
GOVERNMENT: and no public official has a right to override the 
provisions of that contract. To quote Thos. Jas. Norton's Constitution of the 
United States, Its Application, etc., "A law of Congress to be one of the 
supreme laws must be 'made in pursuance thereof and not in conflict with 
the Constitution. When not made in pursuance thereof it is of course 
unconstitutional and of no effect." And the same would similarly apply to 
a wonderful decision rendered by the Supreme Court or an unlawful 
Treaty.
And from Norton's Undermining the Constitution, which quotes 
Alexander Hamilton in No. 33 of The Federalist: "It will not, I presume, 
have escaped observation that it expressly confines the supremacy to laws 
made pursuant to the Constitution" (emphasis by Hamilton). And from 
page 21, "The General Government can claim no powers which are not 
granted to it by the Constitution, and the powers actually granted must be 
such as are expressly given, or given by necessary implication."
Anyone with the presumed intelligence to be President of the USA 
must know that he cannot lawfully make any such far-reaching treaty with
Chapter Thirteen Treason in High Places • 245
the United Nations, or any other foreign power, as you envision by your 
language, without laying himself open to the charge of TREASON under 
ARTICLE III, Section 3 of the Constitution. Just ordinary common sense is 
required to know that our alleged Treaty with the U.N. and acceptance of 
the all-inclusive terms of its Charter by our Presidents (beginning with 
FDR, who connived with Stalin at Yalta for the setting up of the U.N. in the 
USA) and our Senate, is a violation of their sacred oath of office as per 
ARTICLE III, Section 2 of the Constitution.
Such a Treaty makes a mockery of any genuine allegiance to OUR Flag 
and Constitution. A genuine American, Abraham Lincoln, said, "Worse 
than traitors-in-arms are the men who, pretending loyalty to the Flag, feast 
and fatten on the misfortunes of the nation." Think of any TRUTH more 
applicable to the present time?
A number of our officials, including former Secretary of State Dean 
Acheson, the late John Foster Dulles, and members of our present oneworld Kennedy entourage go along with the statement that the USA now 
has NO "domestic" affairs: there has been a melding of our domestic and 
foreign affairs! (Meld means to merge.)
Katanga Province in the Congo thought she had some private affairs 
and rights, but the U.N. soon disillusioned her. Quote from S.L. Tribune for 
September 14,1961: "U.N. Soldiers Take Over in Katanga. U.N. troops 
seized Katanga's capital, Elisabethville, in a brisk battle Wednesday, and 
the Congo's central government proclaimed the return of that secessionist
province." There is no doubt that the President of the USA and Senate have 
surrendered certain of our rights and Sovereignty to the U.N., and plan still 
more.
Any informed American is aware that ARTICLE IV, Section 4, of the 
Constitution automatically cancels out any allegiance to the U.N. and its 
alien one-world Internationalism, the antithesis of Constitutional 
Americanism founded on Washington's "NO foreign entanglements." 
And that said republican representative form of government is the exact 
opposite of the U.N. Charter's Soviet-initiated modifications, restrictions, 
and reservations in its various "Conventions" which would nullify our Bill 
of Rights. Stalin, his protege, Alger Hiss, and Russian Communist Pasvolsky figured largely in the writing of the U.N. Charter.
To assume that a heterogeneous body composed of appointed representatives of foreign governments (some from crude cannibalistic so-called 
"States" and others, from virulently atheistic Communist States) — which
Governments DO NOT REPRESENT "We the American People" — could 
exercise dictation and control over U.S. is monstrous in the extreme. Lawfully or constitutionally, they may not enforce any provisions of the U.N.
246 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
Charter against us, or take any action whatever affecting the Sovereign 
Rights of American Citizens.
Further, the United Nations is not a lawful government in the accepted 
sense of the term and is not a proper body with which to make a treaty. 
Actually, the U.N. has NO valid binding treaty-making power — except as 
the subversive one-worlders try to make it so. Quoting Norton's Constitution of the United States, at page 14: "A treaty is a written contract between 
two governments (not a motley assembly of unstable tribes, or enslaved 
peoples calling themselves a 'government') respecting matters of mutual 
welfare, such as peace, the acouisition of territory, the defining of boundaries, the needs of trade, rights of citizenship..." etc.
And such treaties, even though "legally made," MAY be abrogated for 
cause. Quoting ibid, p. 115: "A precedent for thus abrogating a treaty made 
by the President and approved by the Senate may be found as far back as 
July 7, 1789, when Congress passed 'An Act to Declare the Treaties 
heretofore concluded with France no longer obligatory on the United States 
because they have been repeatedly violated on the part of the French 
government." So what about all the violations of the treaties or agreements made by the USSR, which dominates the U.N.? The USA is vastly 
outvoted in this motley aggregation called the United Nations, even as 
American taxpayers foot most of the bills, which constitutes Constitutionally forbidden confiscation of the citizens' money (property) without just 
compensation therefore. This is merely communistic confiscation.
A Treaty made "pursuant to the Constitution" becomes A PART of the 
LAW OF THE LAND, and should be honored; but it does NOT become 
"Supreme" or take precedence over nor supersede the Constitution. It is 
NOT the "Law of the Land" standing alone. And NO Treaty or Executive 
Agreement is binding on the USA if made by the President alone (as has 
been done) with the advice and consent of the Senate, nor if it violates the 
Constitution.
Actually, ARTICLE VI, instead of setting Treaties on high or being a 
"death trap," is a statement of the SUPREMACY OF THE CONSTITUTION and of the NATIONAL GOVERNMENT. Lawful Treaties are a part 
of, but subordinate to, the Constitution for the simple stated provision 
therein that ALL laws and treaties must be made "in pursuance thereof."
Can the "creature" (or a part) become greater than its CREATOR, or 
the whole??? Some American common sense is necessary in all this blather 
about the supremacy of treaties, which is promulgated largely by the 
one-worlders to discredit or diminish the Constitution so they can achieve 
their own ends.
The language and intent of the Constitution and of ARTICLE VI is
Chapter Thirteen Treason in High Places • 247
clear and forthright, and does not admit, in good faith, of any other interpretation. But sadly enough, it is well known that many of our highest 
judiciary and elected officials — in this era of TREASON, not Reason — do 
not act in good faith nor in "pursuance of the Constitution."
With reference to fourth paragraph your letter Oct. 12th, Mr. Newby,
that the "making of treaties is without limitation, exception or reservation"
and that "no treaty has ever been declared unconstitutional or invalidated
or repealed by the Courts or Congress in the history of this nation," I think
 that the foregoing invalidates your statement. 
And as to ARTICLE VI being a "deathtrap" over which the Constitution gives no control or remedy other than its explicit language in VI 
regarding the law and treaties: has it occurred to you that the Supreme 
Court has power and authority to rule on the constitutionality of treaties 
the same as on the constitutionality of any other law — treaties being 
merely "part of the Law of the Land"? ARTICLE III, Section 2 explicitly 
states: "The Judicial power shall extend to all cases, in Law and Equity, 
arising under this Constitution, the Laws of the United States, and treaties 
made, or which shall be made, under their authority." To quote Norton's 
Constitution of the United States, page 137: "When a case arises in a State 
court and involves a question of the Constitution, or an Act of Congress, or 
of a treaty, it is the duty of the court to follow and enforce the National 
[Constitional] law; for the Constitution explicitly and emphatically requires that the 'judges in every State shall be bound thereby, anything in 
the Constitution or laws of any State to the contrary notwithstanding.'" 
Any time that the President and Senate make a treaty with a foreign 
power (such as the U.N.) which infringes upon or abrogates rights guaranteed citizens of the USA under the Constitution, the Supreme Court can 
declare such treaty unconstitutional, void, and of no effect. Of course, the 
present Supreme Court, being composed of political radicals rather than 
judicial Constitutional experts, is not likely to take such action — unless 
forced to do so by public opinion and demand. 
And so, with reference to your statement in printed CHALLENGE for 
November, 1961, to the effect that, "under ARTICLE II, Section 2, clause 2 
of the Constitution...such treaty (as with the U.N.) can be made without 
restriction, limitation, exception or reservation irrespective of the fact that 
it contravenes, violates, infringes or alienates every article of the Constitution. All that is necessary is for the President and Senate to ratify ANY 
treaty and it is in force." The above article and clause likewise does not 
stand alone, but must be construed in the light of the entire Constitution. 
YOUR interpretation is not only to make idiots of the Founding Fathers 
and Framers of the Constitution, but to say that regardless of the solemn
248 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
Presidential oath of allegiance required by ARTICLE III, Section 2a, regardless of the SUPREME SOVEREIGNTY of the U.S. Constitution, and in 
violation of the explicit language contained in ARTICLE VI, i.e., "THIS 
CONSTITUTION, and the laws of the United States which shall be made in 
pursuance thereof; and all treaties...under the authority of the United 
States...," as well as all authoritative rulings by genuine Constitutional 
authorities to the effect that anything which contravenes the Constitution 
of the USA is null and void, including any such acts by the Congress; 
despite all of the foregoing. I reiterate that YOUR interpretation would 
claim that there is absolutely NO constitutional safeguard for the American 
People against TREASONOUS treaties (which "gives aid and comfort to 
our enemies" as per ARTICLE III, Section 3).
YOUR interpretation would give complete IMMUNITY to the 
maker...of such treaties and would constitute "changing the Constitution 
by usurpation" in violation of the intent, spirit, AND letter of the Constitution as a whole.
The President obviously is NOT a "free agent" by virtue of ARTICLE 
II, Section 2, clause 2, to make any sort of treaty he would like, but is 
BOUND DOWN by the chains of the entire Constitution. Nothing else 
makes any sense. His treaty-making acts are subject to review by the 
Courts.
True, we SHOULD DEMAND rescinding of the action by both Senate 
and Harry S. Truman in signing the U.N. Participation Act of 1945 in behalf 
of the USA. This would put the World on notice that we were once more 
HONORING OUR OWN CONSTITUTION (CHARTER OF FREEDOM) 
AS THE SUPREME LAW OF THE LAND, AND REINSTATING IT TO ITS 
FORMER PROPER SUPREME POSITION: as well as reclaiming our 
Sovereignty as an Independent Republic in accordance with our Declaration of Independence.
There is not nor ever will be any true Peace, Freedom, Safety or 
Security for the American People under the alien U.N. Charter.
There is "NO SUBSTITUTE" for American Independence. Many men 
have died and "worms have eaten them" for a far lesser Cause.
And so, Mr. Newby, you and I do have one primary objective in view: 
GET THE U.S. OUT OF THE U.N., AND THE SUBVERSIVE U.N. OUT OF 
THE USA!
Most sincerely yours,
Marilyn R. Allen
Chapter Thirteen Treason in High Places • 249
I guess that just about covers the U.N. Charter vs. U.S. sovereignty hoax. No 
one should ever be able to bullshit you on this issue again. Your job now is to 
make sure your Congressmen and Senators are educated on this issue.
GET TO WORK — NOW!



Chapter 14 A Proposed Constitutional Model for the Newstates of America

Chapter 14
A PROPOSED
CONSTITUTIONAL
MODEL FOR THE
NEWSTATES OF
AMERICA
Prepared Over a 10-Year Period
by the
Center for Democratic Studies
of Santa Barbara, California,
at a Total Cost to the
United States Taxpayers of
Over $25 Million
252 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Coopi
A PROPOSED CONSTITUTIONAL MODEL FOR THE NEWSTATES OF AMERICA
PREAMBLE
So that we may join in common endeavors, welcome the future in good order, and create an adequate 
and self-repairing government - we, the people, do establish the Newstates of America, herein provided 
to be ours, and do ordain this Constitution whose supreme law it shall be until the time prescribed for it 
shall have run.
ARTICLE I
Rights and Responsibilities 
A. Rights
SECTION 1.. Freedom of expression, of communication, of movement, of assembly, or of petition 
shall not be abridged except in declared emergency.
SECTION 2. Access to information possessed by governmental agencies shall not be denied except in 
interest of national security; but communications among officials necessary to decision making shall be 
be privileged.
SECTION 3. Public communicators may decline to reveal sources of information, but shall be 
responsible for hurtful disclosures.
SECTION 4. The privacy of individuals shall be respected; searches and seizures shall be made only 
on judicial warrant; persons shall be pursued or questioned only for the prevention of crime or the 
apprehension of suspected criminals, and only according to rules established under law.
SECTION 5. There shall be no discrimination because of race, creed, color, origin, or sex. The 
Court of Rights and Responsibilities may determine whether selection for various occupations has been 
discriminatory.
SECTION 6. All persons shall have equal protection of the laws, and in all electoral procedures the 
vote of every eligible citizen shall count equally with others.
SECTION 7. It shall be public policy to promote discussion of public issues and to encourage peaceful 
public gatherings for this purpose. Permission to hold such gatherings shall not be denied, nor shall 
they be interrupted, except in decalred emergency or on a showing of imminent danger to public order 
and on judicial warrant.
SECTION 8. The practice of religion shall be privileged; but no religion shall be imposed by some on 
others, and none shall have public support.
SECTION 9. Any citizen may purchase, sell, lease, hold, convey and inherit real and personal 
property, and shall benefit equally from all laws for security in such transactions.
SECTION 10. Those who cannot contribute to productivity shall be entitled to a share of the national 
product; but distribution shall be fair and the total may not exceed the amount for this purpose held in 
the National Sharing Fund.
SECTION 11. Education shall be provided at public expense for those who meet appropriate tests of 
eligibility.
SECTION 12. No person shall be deprived of life, liberty, or property without due process of law. No 
property shall be taken without compensation.
SECTION 13. Legislatures shall define crimes and conditions requiring restraint, but confinement 
shall not be for punishment; and, when possible, there shall be preparation for return to freedom.
SECTION 14. No person shall be placed twice in jeopardy for the same offense.
SECTION 15. Writs of habeas corpus shall not be suspended except in declared emergency.
SECTION 16. Accused persons shall be informed of charges against them, shall have a speedy trial, 
shall have reasonable bail, shall be allowed to confront witnesses or to call others, and shall not be 
compelled to testify against themselves; at the time of arrest they shall be informed of their right to be 
silent and to have counsel, provided, if necessary, at public expense; and courts shall consider the 
contention that prosecution may be under an invalid or unjust statue.
B. Responsibilities
SECTION 1. Each freedom of the citzen shall prescribe a corresponding responsibility not to diminish 
that of others: of speech, communication, assembly, and petition, to grant the same freedom to others; 
of religion, to respect that of others; of privacy, not to invade that of others; of the holding and disposal 
of property, the obligation to extend the same privilege to others.
SECTION 2. Individuals and enterprises holding themselves out to serve the public shall serve all 
equally and without intention to misrepresent, conforming to such standards as may improve health
3
Chapter 14 Proposed Constitutional Model: Newstates of America • 253
and welfare.
SECTION 3. Protection of the law shall be repaid by assistance in its enforcement; this shall include
respect for the procedures of justice, apprehension of lawbreakers, and testimony at trial.
SECTION 4. Each citizen shall participate in the processes of democracy, assisting in the selection 
of officials and in the monitoring of their conduct in office.
SECTION 5. Each shall render such services to the nation as may be uniformly required by law, 
objection by reason of conscience being adjudicated as hereinafter provided; and none shall expect or 
may receive special privileges unless they be for a public purpose defined by law.
SECTION 6. Each shall pay whatever share of governmental costs is consistent with fairness to all. 
SECTION 7. Each shall refuse awards or titles from other nations or their representatives except as 
they be authorized by law.
SECTION 8. There shall be a responsibility to avoid violence and to keep the peace; for this reason 
the bearing of arms or the possession of lethal weapons shall be confined to the police, members of the 
armed forces, and those licensed under law. 
SECTION 9. Each shall assist in preserving the endowments of nature and enlarging the inheritance 
of future generations.
SECTION 10. Those granted the use of public lands, the air, or waters shall have a responsibility for
using these resources so that, if irreplaceable, they are conserved and, if replaceable, they are put back
as they were.
SECTION 11. Retired officers of the armed forces, of the senior civil service, and of the Senate shall
regard their service as a permanent obligation and shall not engage in enterprise seeking profit from the
government.
SECTION 12. The devising or controlling of devices for management or technology shall establish
responsibility for resulting costs.
SECTION 13. All rights and responsibilities defined herein shall extend to such associations of 
citizens as may be authorized by law.
ARTICLE II
The Newstates
SECTION 1. There shall be Newstates, each comprising no less than 5 percent of the whole
population. Existing states may continue and may have the status of Newstates if the Boundary
Commission, hereinafter provided, shall so decide. The Commission shall be guided in its
recommendations by the probability of accommodation to the conditions for effective government.
States electing by referendum to continue if the Commission recommend otherwise shall nevertheless
except all Newstate obligations.
SECTION 2. The Newstates shall have constitutions formulated and adopted by processes 
hereinafter prescribed.
SECTION 3. They shall have Governors; legislatures, and planning administrative and 
judicial systems.
SECTION 4. Their political procedures shall be organized and supervised by electoral Overseers; but 
their elections shall not be in years of presidential election.
SECTION 5. The electoral apparatus of the Newstates of America shall be available to them, anc 
they may be allotted funds under rules agreed to by the national Overseer; but expenditures may not be 
made by for any candidate except they be approved by the Overseer; and requirements of residence 
in a voting district shall be no longer than thirty days. 
SECTION 6. They may charter subsidiary governments, urban or rural, and may delegate to them 
powers appropriate to their responsibilities.
SECTION 7. They may lay, or may delegate the laying of, taxes; but these shall conform to the
restraints stated hereinafter for the Newstates of America.
SECTION 8. They may not tax exports, may not tax with intent to prevent imports, and may not 
impose any tax forbidden by laws of the Newstates of America; but the objects appropriate for taxation
shall be clearly designated. 
SECTION 9. Taxes on land may be at higher rates than those on its improvements.
SECTION 10. They shall be responsible for the administration of public services not reserved to the
government of the Newstates of America, such activities being concerted with those of corresponding
national agencies, where these exist, under arrangements common to all. 
SECTION 11. The rights and responsibilities prescribed in this Constitution shall be effective in the 
Newstates and shall be suspended only in emergency when declared by Governors and not disapproved
4
254 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
by the Senate of the Newstates of America.
SECTION 12. Police powers of the Newstates shall extend to all matters not reserved to to the 
Newstates of America; but preempted powers shall not be impaired.
SECTION 13. Newstates may not enter into any treaty, alliance, confederation, or agreement unless 
approved by the Boundary Commission hereinafter provided.
They may not coin money, provide for the payment of debts in any but legal tender, or make any 
charge for inter-Newstate services. They may not enact ex post facto laws or ones impairing the 
obligation of contracts.
SECTION 14. Newstates may not impose barriers to imports from other jurisdictions or impose any 
hindrance to citizens' freedom of movement.
SECTION 15. If governments of the Newstates fail to carry out fully their constitutional duties, their 
officials shall be warned and may be required by the Senate, on the recommendationof the Watchkeeper, 
to forfeit revenues from the Newstates of America.
ARTICLE III 
The Electoral Branch
SECTION 1. To arrange for participation by the electorate in the determination of policies and the 
selection of officials, there shall be an Electoral Branch.
SECTION 2. An Overseer of electoral procedures shall be chosen by majority of the Senate and may 
be removed by a two-thirds vote. It shall be the Overseer's duty to supervise the organization of 
national and district parties, arrange for discussion among them, and provide for the nomination and 
election of candidates for public office. While in office the Overseer shall belong to no political 
organization; and after each presidential election shall offer to resign.
SECTION 3. A national party shall be one having had at least a 5 percent affiliation in the latest 
general election; but a new party shall be recognized when valid petitions have been signed by at least 2 
percent of the voters in each of 30 percent of the districts drawn for the House of Representatives. 
Recognition shall be suspended upon failure to gain 5 percent of the votes at a second election, 10 
percent at a third, or 15 percent at further elections.
District parties shall be recognized when at least 2 percent of voters shall have signed petitions of 
affiliation; but recognition shall be withdrawn upon failure to attract the same percentages as are 
neccessary for the continuance of national parties.
SECTION 4. Recognition by the Overseer shall bring parties within established regulations and 
entitle them to common privileges.
SECTION 5. The Overseer shall promulgate rules for party conduct and shall see that fair practices 
are maintained, and for this purpose shall appoint deputies in each district and shall supervise the 
choice, in district and national conventions, of party administrators. Regulations and appointments 
may be objected to by the Senate.
SECTION 6. The Overseer, with the administrator and other officials, shall: 
a. Provide the means for discussion, in each party, of public issues, and for this purpose, ensure that 
members have adequate facilities for participation.
b. Arrange for discussion, in annual district meetings, of the President's views, of the findings of the 
Planning Branch, and such other information as may be pertinent for the enlightened political 
discussion.
c. Arrange, on the first Saturday in each month, for enrollment, valid for one year, of voters at 
convenient places.
SECTION 7. The Overseer shall also:
a. Assist the parties in nominating candidates for district members of the House of Representatives 
each three years; and for this purpose designate one hundred districts, each with a similar number of 
eligible voters, redrawing districts after each election. In these there shall be party conventions having 
no more than three hundred delegates, so distributed that representation of voters be approximately 
equal.
Candidates for delegate may become eligible by presenting petitions signed by two hundred registered 
voters. They shall be elected by party members on the first Tuesday in March, those having the largest 
number of votes being chosen until the three hundred be complete. Ten alternates shall also be chosen 
by the same process.
District conventions shall be held on the first Tuesday in April. Delegates shall choose three 
candidates for membership in the House of Representatives, the three having the most votes becoming 
candidates.
5
Chapter 14 Proposed Constitutional Model: Newstates of America • 255
b Arrange for the election each three years of three members of the House of Representatives in each 
district from among the candidates chosen in party conventions, the three having the most votes to be 
elected.
SECTION 8. The Overseer shall also: 
a. Arrange for national conventions to meet nine years after previous presidential elections, with an 
equal number of delegates from each district, the whole number not to exceed one thousand.
Candidates for delegates shall be eligible when petitions signed by five hundred registered voters have 
been filed. Those with the most votes, together with two alternates, being those next in number of 
votes, shall be chosen in each district.
b. Approve procedures in these conventions for choosing one hundred candidates to be members-atlarge of the House of Representatives, whose terms shall be coterminous with that of the President.
For this purpose delegates shall file one choice with convention officials. Voting on submissions shall
proceed until one hundred achieve 10 percent, but not more than three candidates may be resident in
any one district; if any district have more than three, those with the fewest votes shall be eliminated,
others being added from the districts having less than three, until equality be reached. Of those added,
those having the most votes shall be chosen first.
c. Arrange procedures for the consideration and approval of party objectives by the convention.
d. Formulate rules for the nomination in these conventions of candidates for President and Vice
Presidents when the offices are to fall vacant, candidates for nomination to be recognized when petitions
shall have been presented by one hundred or more delegates, pledged to continue support until
candidates can no longer win or until they consent to withdraw. Presidents and Vice-Presidents,
together with Representatives-at-large, shall submit to referendum after serving for three years, and if
they are rejected, new conventions shall be held within one month and candidates shall be chosen as for
vacant offices.
Candidates for President and Vice-Presidents shall be nominated on attaining a majority. 
e. Arrange for the election on the first Tuesday in June, in appropriate years, of new candidates for 
President and Vice-Presidents, and members-at-large of the House of Representatives, all being 
presented to the nation's voters as a ticket; if no ticket achieve a majority, the Overseer shall arrange 
another election, on the third Tuesday in June, between the two persons having the most votes; and if 
referendum so determine he shall provide similar arrangements for the nomination and election of 
candidates. 
In this election, the one having the most votes shall prevail. 
SECTION 9. The Overseer shall also: 
a. Arrange for the convening of the national legislative houses on the fourth Tuesday of July.
b. Arrange for inauguration of the President and Vice-Presidents on the second Tuesday of August.
SECTION 10. All costs of electoral procedures shall be paid from public funds, and there shall be no
private contributions to parties or candidates; no contributions or expenditures for meetings,
conventions, or campaigns shall be made; and no candidate for office may make any personal
expenditures unless authorized by a uniform rule of the Overseer; and persons or group- making
expenditures, directly or indirectly, in support of prospective candidates shall report to the Overseer
and shall conform to his regulations.
SECTION 11. Expenses of the Electoral Branch shall be met by the addition of one percent to the net
annual taxable income returns of taxpayers, this sum to be held by the Chancellor of Financial Affairs
for disposition by the Overseer.
Funds shall be distributed to parties in proportion to the respective number of votes cast for the 
President and Governors at the last election, except that new parties, on being recognized, shall share 
in proportion to their number. Party adminstrators shall make allocations to legislative candidates in 
amounts proportional to the party vote at the last election. 
Expenditures shall be audited by the Watchkeeper; and sums not expended within four years shall be 
returned to the Treasury. 
It shall be a condition of every communications franchise that reasonable facilities shall be available 
for allocations by the Overseer.
ARTICLE IV 
The Planning Branch 
SECTION 1. There shall be a Planning Branch to formulate and administer plans and to prepare 
budgets for the uses of expected income in pursuit ot policies formulated by the processes provided
herein.
256 » BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
SECTION 2. There shall be a National Planning Board of fifteen members appointed by the 
President; the first members shall have terms designated by the President of one to fifteen years, 
thereafter one shall be appointed each year; the President shall appoint a Chairman who shall serve for 
fifteen years unless removed by him.
SECTION 3. The Chairman shall appoint, and shall supervise, a planning administrator, together 
with such deputies as may be agreed to by the Board.
SECTION 4. The Chairman shall present to the Board six-and twelve year development plans 
prepared by the planning staff. They shall be revised each year after public hearings, and finally in the 
year before they are to take effect. They shall be submitted to the President on the fourth Tuesday in 
July for transmission to the Senate on September 1st with his comments.
If members of the Board fail to approve the budget proposals by the forwarding date, the Chairman 
shall nevertheless make submission to the President with notations of reservation by such members 
The President shall transmit this proposal, with his comments, to the House of Representatives on 
September 1.
SECTION 5. It shall be recognized that the six-and twelve-year development plans represent 
national intentions tempered by the appraisal of possibilities. The twelve-year plan shall be a general 
estimate of probable progress, both governmental and private; the six-year plan shall be more specific 
as to estimated income and expenditure and shall take account of necessary revisions.
The purpose shall be to advance, through every agency of government, the excellence of national life. 
It shall be the further purpose to anticipate innovations, to estimate their impact, to assimilate them 
into existing institutions, and to moderate deleterious effects on the environment and on society.
The six-and twelve-year plans shall be disseminated for dicussion and the opinions expressed shall be 
considered in the formulation of plans for each succeeding year with special attention to detail in 
proposing the budget.
SECTION 6. For both plans an extension of one year into the future shall be made each year and the 
estimates for all other years shall be revised accordingly. For nongovernmental activities the estimate of 
developments shall be calculated to indicate the need for enlargement or restriction.
SECTION 7. If there be objection by the President or the Senate to the six-or Twelve-year plans, 
they shall be returned for restudy and resubmission. If there still be differences, and if the President and 
the Senate agree, they shall prevail. If they do not agree, the Senate shall prevail and the plan shall be 
revised accordingly.
SECTION 8. The Newstates, on June 1, shall submit proposals for development to be considered for 
inclusion in those for the Newstates of America. Researches and administration shall be 
delegated,when convenient, to planning agencies of the Newstates.
SECTION 9. There shall be submissions from private individuals or from organized associations 
affected with a public interest, as defined by the Board. They shall report intentions to expand or 
contract, estimates of production and demand, probable uses of resources, numbers expected to be 
employed, and other essential information. 
SECTION 10. The Planning Branch shall make and have custody of offical maps, and these shall be 
documents of reference for future developments both public and private; on them the location of 
facilities, with extension indicated, and the intended use of all areas shall be marked out.
Offical maps shall also be maintained by the planning agencies of the Newstates, and in matters not 
exclusively national the National Planning Board may rely on these.
Undertakings in violation of official designation shall be at the risk of the venturer, and there shall be 
no recourse; but losses from designations after acquisition shall be recoverable in actions before the 
Court of Claims.
SECTION 11.The Planning Branch shall have available to it funds equal to one-half of one percent of 
the approved national budget (not including debt services or payments from trust funds). They shall be 
held by the Chancellor of Financial Affairs and expended according to rules approved by the Board; but 
funds not expended within six years shall be available for other uses.
SECTION 12.Allocations may be made for the planning agencies of the Newstates; but only the maps 
and plans of the national Board, or those approved by them, shall have status at law. 
SECTION 13.In making plans, there shall be due regard to the interests of other nations and such 
cooperation with their intentions as may be approved by the Board.
SECTION 14.There may also be cooperation with international agencies and such contributions to 
their work as are not disapproved by the President.
7
Chapter 14 Proposed Constitutional Model: Newstates of America • 257
ARTICLE V 
The Presidency
SECTION 1 .The President of the Newstates of America shall be the head of government, shaper of its 
commitments, expositor of its policies, and supreme commander of its protective forces; shall have one 
term of nine years, unless rejected by 60 percent of the electorate after three years; shall take care that 
the nation's resources are estimated and are apportioned to its more exigent needs; shall recommend 
such plans, legislation, and action as may be necessary; and shall address the legislators each year on 
the state of the nation, calling upon them to do their part for the general good.
SECTION 2.There shall be two Vice-Presidents elected with the President; at the time of taking office 
the President shall designate one Vice-President to supervise internal affairs; and one to be deputy for 
general affairs. The deputy for general affairs shall succeed if the presidency be vacated; the VicePresident for internal affairs shall be second in succession. If either Vice-President shall die or be 
incapacitated the President, with the consent of the Senate, shall appoint a successor. Vice-Presidents 
shall serve during an extended term with such assignments as the President may make.
If the presidency fall vacant through the disability of both Vice-Presidents, the Senate shall elect 
successors from among its members to serve until the next general election. 
With the Vice-Presidents and other officials the President shall see to it that the laws are faithfully 
executed and shall pay attention to the findings and recommendations of the Planning Board, the 
National Regulatory Board, and the Watchkeeper in formulating national policies. 
SECTION 3. Responsible to the Vice-President for General Affairs there shall be Chancellors of 
External, Financial, Legal, and Military Affairs. 
The Chancellor of External Affairs shall assist in conducting relations with other nations.
The Chancellor of Financial Affairs shall supervise the nation's financial and monetary systems, 
regulating its capital markets and credit-issuing institutions as they may be established by law; and this 
shall include lending institutions for operations in other nations or in cooperation with them, except 
that treaties may determine their purposes and standards.
The Chancellor of Legal Affairs shall advise governmental agencies and represent them before the
courts.
The Chancellor of Military Affairs shall act for the presidency in disposing all armed forces except 
militia commanded by governors; but these shall be available for national service at the President's 
convenience. 
Except in declared emergency, the deployment of forces in far waters or in other nations without 
their consent shall be notified in advance to a national security committee of the Senate hereinafter 
provided. 
SECTION 4. Responsible to the Vice-President for Internal Affairs there shall be chancellors of such 
departments as the President may find necessary for performing the services of government and are not 
rejected by a two-thirds vote when the succeeding budget is considered. 
SECTION 5. Candidates for the presidency and the vice-presidencies shall be natural-born citizens, 
Their suitability may be questioned by the Senate within ten days of their nomination, and if two-thirds 
of the whole agree, they shall be ineligible and a nominating convention shall be reconvened. At the 
time of his nomination no candidate shall be a member of the Senate and none shall be on active service 
in the armed forces or a senior civil servant.
SECTION 6.The President may take leave because of illness or for an interval of relief, and the 
Vice-President in charge of General Affairs shall act. The President may resign if the Senate agree; 
and, if the term shall have more than two years to run, the Overseer shall arrange for a special election 
for President and Vice-President. 
SECTION 7. The Vice-Presidents may be directed to perform such ministerial duties as the 
President may find convenient; but their instructions shall be of record,aand their actions shall be 
taken as his deputy.
SECTION 8.Incapacitation may be established without concurrence of the President by a threequarters vote of the Senate, whereupon a successor shall become Acting President until the disability be 
declared, by a similar vote, to be ended or to have become permanent. Similarly the other VicePresident shall succeed if a predecessor die or be disabled. Special elections, in these contingencies, may 
be required by the Senate.
Acting Presidents may appoint deputies, unless the Senate object, to assume their duties until the 
next election. 
SECTION 9. The Vice-Presidents, together with such other officials as the President may designate
8
258 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
from time to time, may constitute a cabinet or council; but this shall not include officials of other 
branches.
SECTION 10. Treaties or agreements with other nations, negotiated under the President's 
authority, shall be in effect unless objected to by a majority of the Senate within ninety days. If they are 
objected to, the President may resubmit and the Senate reconsider. If a majority still object, the Senate 
shall prevail.
SECTION 11. All officers, except those of other branches, shall be appointed and may be removed 
by the President. A majority of the Senate may object to appointments within sixty days, and alternative 
candidates shall be offered until it agrees.
SECTION 12. The President shall notify the Planning Board and the House of Representatives, on 
the fourth Tuesday in June, what the maximum allowable expenditures for the ensuing fiscal year shall 
be.
The President may determine to make expenditures less than provided in appropriations; but, except 
in declared emergency, none shall be made in excess of appropriations. Reduction shall be because of 
changes in requirements and shall not be such as to impair the integrity of budgetary procedures.
SECTION 13. There shall be a Public Custodian, appointed by the President and removable by him, 
who shall have charge of properties belonging to the government, but not allocated to specific agencies, 
who shall administer common public services, shall have charge of building construction and 
rentals,and shall have such other duties as may be designated by the President or the designated VICE
Presidents.
SECTION 14. There shall be an Intendant responsible to the President who shall supervise Offices 
for Intelligence and Investigation; also an Office of Emergency Organization with the duty of providing 
plans and procedures for such contingencies as can be anticipated.
The Intendant shall also charter nonprofit corporations (or foundations), unless the President shall 
object, determined by him to be for useful public purposes. Such corporations shall be exempt from 
taxation but shall conduct no profitmaking enterprises.
SECTION 15. The Intendant shall also be a counselor for the coordination of scientific and cultural 
experiments, and for studies within the government and elsewhere, and for this purpose shall employ 
such assistance as may be found necessary.
SECTION 16. Offices for other purposes may be established and may be discontinued by presidential 
order within the funds allocated in the procedures of appropriation.
ARTICLE VI
The Legislative Branch
(The Senate and the House of Representatives)
A. The Senate
SECTION 1.There shall be a Senate with membership as follows: If they so desire, former 
Presidents, Vice-Presidents, Principal Justices, Overseers, Chairmen of the Planning and Regulatory 
Boards, Governors having had more than seven years service, and unsuccessful candidates for the 
presidency and vice-presidency who have received at least 30 percent of the vote. To be appointed by 
the President, three persons who have been Chancellors, two officials from the civil service, two 
officials from the diplomatic services,two senior military officers,also one person from a panel of three, 
elected in a process approved by the Overseer, by each of twelve such groups or associations as the 
President may recognize from time to time to be nationally representative, but none shall be a political 
or religious group, no individual selected shall have been paid by any private interest to influence 
government, and any association objected to by the Senate shall not be recognized. Similarly, to be 
appointed by the Principal Justice, two persons distinguished in public law and two former members of 
the High Courts or the Judicial Council. Also, to be elected by the House of Representatives, three 
members who have served six or more years.
Vacancies shall be filled as they occur.
SECTION 2. Membership shall continue for life, except that absences not provided for by rule shall 
constitute retirement, and that Senators may retire voluntarily.
SECTION 3. The Senate shall elect as presiding officer a Convener who shall serve for two years 
when his further service may be discontinued by a majority vote. Other officers, including a Deputy, 
shall be appointed by the Convener unless the Senate shall object.
SECTION 4. The Senate shall meet each year on the second Tuesday in July and shall be in 
continuous session, but may adjourn to the call of the Convener. A quorum shall be more than three9
Chapter 14 Proposed Constitutional Model: Newstates of America • 259
fifths of the whole membership
SECTION 5. The Senate shall consider,and return within thirty days, all measures approved by the 
House of Representatives (except the annual budget). Approval or disapproval shall be by a majority
vote of those present. Objection shall stand unless the House of Representatives shall overcome it by a 
majority vote plus one; if no return be made, approval by the House of Representatives shall be final.
For consideration of laws passed by the House of Representatives or for other purposes, the Convener 
may appoint appropriate committees.
SECTION 6. The Senate may ask advice from the Principal Justice concerning the constitutionality 
of measures before it; and if this be done, the time for return to the House of Representatives may
extend to ninety days.
SECTION 7. If requested, the Senate may advise the President on matters of public interest; or, if 
not requested, by resolution approved by two-thirds of those present. There shall be a special duty to 
expressions of concern during party conventions and commitments made during campaigns; and if 
these be neglected, to remind the President and the House of Representatives that these undertakings 
are to be considered.
SECTION 8. In time of present or prospective danger caused by cataclysm, by attack, or by 
insurrection, the Senate may declare a national emergency and may authorize the President to take
appropriate action. If the Senate be dispersed, and no quorum available, the President may proclaim the
emergency, and may terminate it unless the Senate shall have acted. If the President be not available, 
and the circumstances extreme, the senior serving member of the presidential succession may act until 
a quorum assembles.
SECTION 9. The Senate may also define and declare a limited emergency in time of prospective 
danger, or of local or regional disaster, or if an extraordinary advantage be anticipated. It shall be 
considered by the House of Representatives within three days and, unless disapproved, may extend for a 
designated period and for a limited area before renewal.
Extraordinary expenditures during emergency may be approved, without regard to usual budget
procedures, by the House of Representatives with the concurrence of the President. 
SECTION 10. The Senate,at the beginning of each session, shall select three of its members to 
constitute a National Security Committee to be consulted by the President in emergencies requiring 
the deployment of the armed forces abroad. If the Committee dissent from the President's proposal, it 
shall report to the Senate, whose decision shall be final.
SECTION 11.The Senate shall elect, or may remove, a National Watchkeeper, and shall oversee, 
through a standing committee, a Watchkeeping Service conducted according to rules formulated for 
their approval.
With the assistance of an appropriate staff the Watchkeeper shall gather and organize information
concerning the adequacy, competence, and integrity of governmental agencies and their personnel, as
well as their continued usefulness; and shall also suggest the need for new or expanded services,
making report concerning any agency of the deleterious effect of its activities on citizens or on the
environment.
The Watchkeeper shall entertain petitions for the redress of grievances and shall advise the
appropriate agencies if there be need for action. 
For all these purposes, personnel may be appointed, investigations made, witnesses examined,
post audits made, and information required. 
The Convener shall present the Watchkeeper's findings to the Senate, and if it be judged to be in the 
public interest, they shall be made public or, without being made public, be sent to the appropriate 
agency for its guidance and such action as may be needed. On recommendation of the Watchkeeper the 
Senate may initiate corrective measures to be voted on by the House of Representatives within thirty 
days. When approved by a majority and not vetoed by the President, they shall become law. 
For the Watchkeeping Service one-quarter of one percent of individual net taxable incomes shall be 
held by the Chancellor of Financial Affairs; but amounts not expended in any fiscal year shall be 
available for general use.
B. The House of Representatives 
SECTION 1. The House of Representatives shall be original lawmaking body of the Newstates of
America.
SECTION 2.It shall convene each yell on the second Tuesday in July and shall remain in 
continuous session except that it may adjourn to the call of a Speaker, elected by a majority vote from
10
260 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
among the Representatives-at-large, who shall be its presiding officer.
SECTION 3. It shall be a duty to implement the provisions of this constitution and, in legislature 
to be guided by them.
SECTION 4. Party leaders and their deputies shall be chosen by caucus at the beginning of each 
session.
SECTION 5. Standing and temporary committees shall be selected as follows:
Committees dealing with the calendaring and management of bills shall have a majority of members 
nominated to party caucuses by the Speaker; other members shall be nominated by minority leaders 
Membership shall correspond to the parties' proportions at the last election. If nominations be not 
approved by a majority of the caucus, the Speaker or the minority leaders shall nominate others until a 
majority shall approve.
Members of other committees shall be chosen by party caucus in proportion to the results of the last 
election. Chairmen shall be elected annually from among at-large-members.
Bills referred to committees shall be returned to the house with recommendations within sixty days 
unless extension be voted by the House.
In all committee actions names of those voting for and against shall be recorded.
No committee chairman may serve longer than six years.
SECTION 6. Approved legislation, not objected to by the Senate within the allotted time, shall be 
presented to the President for his approval or disapproval. If the President disapprove,and threequarters of the House membership still approve, it shall become law. The names of those voting for and 
against shall be recorded. Bills not returned within eleven days shall become law.
SECTION 7.The President may have thirty days to consider measures approved by the House 
unless they shall have been submitted twelve days previous to adjournment.
SECTION 8. The house shall consider promptly the annual budget; if there be objection, it shall be 
notified to the Planning Board; The Board shall then resubmit through the President; and,with his 
comments, it shall be returned to the House. If there still be objection by a two-thirds majority, the 
House shall prevail. Objection must be by whole title; titles not objected to when voted on shall 
constitute appropriation.
The budget for the fiscal year shall be in effect on January 1. Titles not yet acted on shall be as in the 
former budget until action be completed.
SECTION 9. It shall be the duty of the House to make laws concerning taxes.
1. For their laying and collection:
a. They shall be uniform, and shall not be retroactive.
b. Except such as may be authorized by law to be laid by Authorities, or by the Newstates, all 
collections shall be made by a national revenue agency. This shall include collections for trust funds 
hereinafter authorized.
c. Except for corporate levies to be held in the National Sharing Fund, hereinafter authorized, taxes 
may be collected only from individuals and only from incomes; but there may be withholding from 
current incomes.
d. To assist in the maintenance of economic stability, the President may be authorized to alter rates 
by executive order.
e. They shall be imposed on profitmaking enterprises owned or conducted by religious establishments 
or other nonprofit organizations.
f. There shall be none on food, medicines, residential rentals, or commodities or services designated 
by law as necessities; and there shall be no double taxation.
g. None shall be levied for registering ownership or transfer of property.
2. For expenditure from revenues:
a. For the purposes detailed in the annual budget unless objection be made by the procedure 
prescribed herein.
b. For such other purposes as the House may indicate and require the Planning Board to include in 
revision of the budget; but, except in declared emergency, the total may not exceed the President's 
estimate of available funds.
3. For fixing the percentage of net corporate taxable incomes to be paid into a National Sharing Fund 
to be held in the custody of the Chancellor of Financial Affairs and made available for such welfare and 
environmental purposes as are authorized by law.
4. To provide for the regulation of commerce with other nations and among the Newstates, 
Possessions, Territories; or, as shall be mutually agreed, with other organized governments; but 
exports shall not be taxed; and imports shall not be taxed except on recommendation of the President at
11
Chapter 14 Proposed Constitutional Model: Newstates of America • 261
rates whose allowable variations shall have been fixed by law. There shall be no quotas, and no nations 
favored by special rates, unless by special acts requiring two-thirds majorities.
5. To establish, or provide for the establishment of, institutions for the safekeeping of savings, for the
gathering and distribution of capital, for the issuance of credit, for regulating the coinage of money, for
controlling the media of exchange, and for stabilizing prices; but such institutions, when not public or
semipublic, shall be regarded as affected with the public interest and shall be supervised by the
Chancellor of Financial Affairs.
6. To establish institutions for insurance against risks and liabilities for communication, 
transportation, and others commonly used and necessary for public convenience.
8. To assist in the maintenance of world order,and, for this purpose, when the President shall 
recommend, to vest jurisdiction in international legislative, judicial, or administrative agencies.
9. To develop with other peoples, and for the benefit of all, the resources of space, of other bodies in 
the universe, and of the seas beyond twelve miles from low-water shores unless treaties shall provide
other limits.
10. To assist other peoples who have not attained satisfactory levels of well-being; to delegate the
administration of funds for assistance, whenever possible, to international agencies; and to invest in or 
contribute to the furthering of development in other parts of the world.
11. To assure, or to assist in assuring, adequate and equal facilities for education; for training in 
occupations citizens may be fitted to pursue; and to reeducate or retrain those whose occupations may
become obsolete.
12. To establish or to assist institutions devoted to higher education, to research, or to technical 
training.
13. To establish and maintain, or assist in maintaining, libraries, archives, monuments, and other 
places of historic interest.
14. To assist in the advancement of sciences and technologies; and to encourage cultural activities.
15. To conserve natural resources by purchase, by withdrawal from use, or by regulation; to 
provide, or to assist in providing, facilities for recreation; to establish and maintain parks, forests, 
wilderness areas, wetlands, and prairies; to improve streams and other waters; to ensure the purity of
air and water; to control the erosion of soils; and to provide for all else necessary for the protection and
common use of the national heritage.
16. To acquire property and improvements for public use at costs to be fixed, if necessary, by the
Court of Claims.
17. To prevent the stoppage or hindrance of governmental procedures, or other activities affected
with a public interest as defined by law, by reason of disputes between employers and employees, or for
other reasons, and for this purpose to provide for conclusive arbitration if adequate provision for 
collective bargaining fail. From such findings there may be appeal to the Court of Arbitration Review; 
but such proceedings may not stay the acceptance of findings.
18. To support an adequate civil service for the performance of such duties as may be designated by 
administrators; and for this purpose to refrain from interference with the processes of appointment or
placement, asking advice or testimony before committees only with the consent of appropriate 
superiors.
19. To provide for the maintenance of armed forces.
20. To enact such measures as will assist families in making adjustment to future conditions, using 
estimates concerning population and resources made by the Planning Board.
21. To vote within ninety days on such measures as the President may designate as urgent.
Article VII 
The Regulatory Branch 
SECTION 1. There shall be a Regulatory Branch, and there shall be a National Regulator chosen by 
majority vote of the Senate and removable by a two-thirds vote of that body. His term shall be seven 
years, and he shall make and administer rules for the conduct of all economic enterprises.
The Regulatory Branch shall have such agencies as the Board may find necessary and are not
disapproved by law.
SECTION 2. The Regulatory Board shall consist of seventeen members recommended to the Senate 
by the Regulator. Unless rejected by majority vote they shall act with the Regulator as a lawmaking 
body for industry.
They shall initially have terms of one to seventeen years, one being replaced each year and serving for
12
262 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
seventeen years. They shall be compensated and shall have no other occupation.
SECTION 3. Under procedures approved by the Board,the Regulator shall charter all corporations 
or enterprises except those exempted because of size or other characteristics, or those supervised by the 
Chancellor of Financial Affairs, or by the Intendant, or those whose activities are confined to one 
Newstate.
Charters shall describe proposed activities, and departure from these shall require amendment on 
penalty of revocation. For this purpose there shall be investigation and enforcement services under the 
direction of the Regulator.
SECTION 4. Chartered enterprises in similar industries or occupations may organize joint 
Authorities. These may formulate among themselves codes to ensure fair competition, meet external 
costs, set standards for quality and service, expand trade, increase production, eliminate waste, and 
assist in standardization. Authorities may maintain for common use services for research and 
communication; but membership shall be open to all eligible enterprises. Nonmembers shall be 
required to maintain the same standards as those prescribed for members.
SECTION 5. Authorities shall have governing committees of five, two being appointed by the 
Regulator to represent the public. They shall serve as he may determine; they shall be compensated; 
and he shall take care that there be no conflicts of interest. The Board may approve or prescribe rules for 
the distribution of profits to stockholders, allowable amounts of working capital, and reserves. Costing 
and all other practices affecting the public interest shall be monitored.
All codes shall be subject to review by the Regulator with his board.
SECTION 6. Member enterprises of an Authority shall be exempt from other regulation.
SECTION 7. The Regulator, with his Board, shall fix standards and procedures for mergers of 
enterprises or the acquisition of some by others; and these shall be in effect unless rejected by the Court 
of Administrative Settlements. The purpose shall be to encourage adaptation to change and to further 
approved intentions for the nation.
SECTION 8. The charters of enterprises may be revoked and Authorities may be dissolved by the 
Regulator, with the concurrence of the Board, if they restrict the production of goods and services, or 
controls of their prices; also if external costs are not assessed to their originators or if the ecological 
impacts of their operations are deleterious.
SECTION 9. Operations extending abroad shall conform to policies notified to the Regulator by the 
President; and he shall restrict or control such activities as appear to injure the national interest.
SECTION 10. The Regulator shall make rules for and shall supervise marketplaces for goods and 
services; but this shall not include security exchanges regulated by the Chancellor of Financial Affairs.
SECTION 11. Designation of enterprises affected with a public interest, rules for conduct of 
enterprises and of their Authorities, and other actions of the Regulator or of the Boards may be 
appealed to the Court of Administrative Settlements, whose judgments shall be informed by the 
intention to establish fairness to consumers and competitors and stability in economic affairs.
SECTION 12. Responsible also to the Regulator, there shall be an Operations Commission 
appointed by the Regulator, unless the Senate object, for the supervision of enterprises owned in whole 
or in part by government. The commission shall choose its chairman, and he shall be the executive 
head of a supervisory staff. He may require reports, conduct investigations, and make rules and 
recommendations concerning surpluses or deficits, the absorption of external costs, standards of 
service, and rates or prices charged for services or goods.
Each enterprise shall have a director, chosen by and removable by the Commission; and he shall 
conduct its affairs in accordance with standards fixed by the Commission.
Article VIII 
The Judicial Branch
SECTION 1. There shall be a Principal Justice of the Newstates for America; a Judicial Council; 
and a Judicial Assembly. There shall also be a Supreme Court and a High Court of Appeals; also Courts 
of Claims, Rights and Duties, Administrative Review. Arbitration Settlements, Tax Appeals, and 
Appeals from Watchkeeper's Findings. There shall be Circuit Courts to be of first resort in suits 
brought under national law; and they shall hear appeals from courts of the Newstates.
Other courts may be established by law on recommendation of the Principal Justice with the Judicial 
Council.
SECTION 2. The Principal Justice shall preside over the judicial system, shall appoint the members 
of all national courts, and, unless the Judicial Council object, shall make us rules; also, through an
13
Chapter 14 Proposed Constitutional Model: Newstates of America • 263
Administrator, supervise its operations.
SECTION 3. The Judicial Assembly shall consist of Circuit Court Judges, together with those of the 
High Courts of the Newstates of America and those of the highest courts of the Newstates. It shall meet 
annually, or at the call of the Principal Justice, to consider the state of the Judiciary and such other 
matters as may be laid before it.
It shall also meet at the call of the Convener to nominate three candidates for the Principal 
Justiceship whenever a vacancy shall occur. From these nominees the Senate shall choose the one
 having the most votes. 
SECTION 4. The Principal Justice, unless the Senate object to any, shall appoint a Judicial Council 
of five members to serve during his incumbency. He shall designate a senior member who shall preside 
in his absence. 
It shall be the duty of the Council, under the direction of the Principal Justice, to study the courts in 
operation, to prepare codes of ethics to be observed by members, and to suggest changes in procedure. 
The Council may ask the advice of the Judicial Assembly. 
It shall also be a duty of the Council, as hereinafter provided, to suggest Constitutional amendments 
when they appear to be necessary; and it shall also draft revisions if they shall be required. Further it 
shall examine,and from time to time cause to be revised, civil and criminal codes; these, when 
approved by the Judicial Assembly, shall be in effect throughout the nation.
SECTION 5. The Principal Justice shall have a term of eleven years; but if at any time the 
incumbent resign or be disabled from continuing in office, as may be determined by the Senate, 
replacement shall be by the senior member of the Judicial Council until a new selection be made. After 
six years the Assembly may provide, by a two-thirds vote, for discontinuance in office, and a successor 
shall then be chosen.
SECTION 6. The Principal Justice may suspend members of any court for incapacity or violation of 
rules; and the separation shall be final if a majority of the Council agree.
 For each court the Principal Justice shall, from time to time, appoint a member who shall preside. 
SECTION 7. A presiding judge may decide, with the concurrence of the senior judge, that there 
may be pretrial proceedings, that criminal trials shall be conducted by either investigatory or adversary 
proceedings, and whether there shall be a jury and what the number of jurors shall be; but 
investigatory proceedings shall require a bench of three. 
SECTION 8. In deciding on the concordance of statutes with the Constitution, the Supreme Court 
shall return to the House of Representatives such as it cannot construe. If the House fail to make return 
within ninety days the Court may interpret. 
SECTION 9. The Principal Justice, or the President, may grant pardons or reprieves. 
SECTION 10. The High Courts shall have thirteen members; but nine members, chosen by their 
senior justices from time to time, shall constitute a court. The justices on leave shall be subject to
recall.
Other courts shall have nine members; but seven, chosen by their senior, shall constitute a court. 
All shall be in continuous session except for recesses approved by the Principal Justice. 
SECTION 11. The Principal Justice, with the Council, may advise the Senate, when requested, 
concerning the appropriateness of measures approved by the House of Representatives; and may also 
advise the President, when requested, on matters he may refer for consultation. 
SECTION 12. It shall be for other branches to accept and to enforce judicial decrees. 
SECTION 13. The High Court of Appeals may select applications for further consideration by the 
Supreme Court of decisions reached by other courts, including those of the Newstates. If it agree that 
there be a constitutional issue it may make preliminary judgment to be reviewed without hearing, and 
finally, by the Supreme Court.
SECTION 14. The Supreme Court may decide:
a. Whether, in litigation coming to it on appeal, constitutional provisions have been violated or 
standards have not been met.
b. On the application of constitutional provisions to suits involving the Newstates. 
c. Whether international law, as recognized in treaties. United Nations aggreements, or 
arrangements with other nations, has been ignored or violated.
d. Other causes involving the interpretation of constitutional provisions; except that in holding any 
branch to have exceeded its powers the decision shall be suspended until the Judicial Court shall have 
determined whether, in order to avoid confrontation, procedures for amendment of the Constitution 
are appropriate.
If amendatory proceedings are instituted, decision shall await the outcome.
SECTION 15. The Courts of the Newstates shall have i n i t ia l jurisdiction in cases arising under their
14
264 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
laws except those involing the Newstate itself or those reserved for national courts by a rule of the 
Principal Justice with the Judicial Council.
ARTICLE IX 
General Provisions
SECTION 1. Qualifications for participation in democratic procedures as a citizen, and eligibility for 
office, shall be subject to repeated study and redefinition; but any change in qualification or eligibility 
shall become effective only if not disapproved by the Congress.
For this purpose a permanent Citizenship and Qualifications Commission shall be constituted, four 
members to be appointed by the President, three by the Convener of the Senate, three by the Speaker of 
the House, and three by the Principal Justice. Vacancies shall be filled as they occur. The members 
shall choose a chairman; they shall have suitable assistants and accommodations; and they may have 
other occupations. Recommendations of the commission shall be presented to the President and shall be 
transmitted to the House of Representatives with comments. They shall have a preferred place on the 
calendar and, of approved, shall be in effect.
SECTION 2. Areas necessary for the uses of government may be accquired at its valuation and may 
be maintained as the public interest may require. Such areas shall have self-government in matters of 
local concern.
SECTION 3. The President may negotiate for the acquisition of areas outside the Newstates of 
America, and, if the Senate approve, may provide for their organization as Possessions or Territories
SECTION 4. The President may make agreements with other organized peoples for a relation other 
than full membership in the Newstates of America. They may become citizens and may participate in 
the selection of officials. They may receive assistance for their development or from the National 
Sharing Fund if they conform to its requirements; and they may serve in civilian or military services, 
but only as volunteers. They shall be represented in the House of Representatices by members elected at 
large, their number proportional to their constituencies; but each shall have at least one; and each shall 
in "the same way choose one permanent member of the Senate.
SECTION 5. The President, the Vice - Presidents, and members of the legislative houses shall in all 
cases except treason, felony, and breach of the peace be exempt from penalty for anything they may say 
while pursuing public duties; but the Judicial Council may make restraining rules.
SECTION 6. Except as otherwise provided by this Constitution, each legislative house shall establish 
its requirement for membership and may make rules for the conduct of members, including conflicts of 
interest, providing its own disciplines for their infraction.
SECTION 7. No Newstate shall interfere with officials of the Newstates of America in the 
performance of their duties, and all shall give full faith and credit to the Acts of other Newstates and of 
the Newstates of America.
SECTION 8. Public funds shall be expended only as authorized in this Constitution.
ARTICLE X 
Governmental Arrangements
SECTION 1. Offices of the Newstates of America shall be those named in this Constitution, 
including those of the legislative houses and others authorized by law to be appointed; they shall be 
compensated, and none may have other paid occupation unless they be excepted by law; none shall 
occupy more than one position in government; and no gift or favor shall be accepted if in any way 
related to official duty.
No income from former employments or associations shall continue for their benefits; but their 
properties may be put in trust and managed without their intervention during continuance in office. 
Hardships under this rule may be considered by the Court of Rights and Duties, and exceptions may be 
made with due regard to the general intention.
SECTION 2. The President, the Vice-Presidents, and the Principal Justice shall have households 
appropriate to their duties. The President, the Vice-Presidents, the Principal Justice, the Chairman of 
the Planning Board, the Regulator, the Watchkeeper, and the Overseer shall have salaries fixed by law 
and continued for life; but if they become members of the Senate, they shall have senatorial 
compensation and shall conform to senatorial requirements.
Justices of the High Courts shall have no term; and their salaries shall be two-thirds that of the 
Principal Justice; they and members of the Judicial Council, unless they shall have become Senators, 
shall be permanent members of the Judiciary and shall be available for assignment by the Principal 
Justice.
15
 Chapter l4 Proposed Constitutional Model: Newstates of America • 265 
Salaries for members of the Senate shall be the same as for Justices of the High Court of Appeals. 
SECTION 3. Unless otherwise provided herein, officials designated by the head of a branch as 
sharers in policymaking may be appointed by him with the President's concurrence and unless the 
Senate shall object. 
SECTION 4. There shall be administrators:
a. for executive offices and official households, appointed by authority of the President; 
b. for the national courts, appointed by the Principal Justice;
c. for the Legislative Branch, selected by a committee of members from each house (chosen by the 
Convener and the Speaker), three from the House of Representatices and four from the Senate.
Appropriations shall be made to them; but those for the Presidency shall not be reduced during his 
term unless with his consent; and those for the Judicial Branch shall not be reduced during five years 
succeding their determination, unless with the consent of the Principal Justice. 
SECTION 5. The fiscal year shall be the same as the calendar year, with new appropriations available 
at its beginning.
SECTION 6. There shall be an Officials' Protective Service to guard the President, the VicePresidents, the Principal Justice, and other officials whose safety may be at hazard; and there shall be a
Protector appointed by and responsible to a standing committee of the Senate. Protected officials shall
be guided by procedures approved by the committee.
The service, at the request of the Political Overseer, may extend its protection to candidates for
office; or to other officials, if the committee so decide. 
SECTION 7. A suitable contingency fund shall be made available to the President for purposes
defined by law.
SECTION 8. The Senate shall try officers of government other than legislators when such officers are
impeached by a two-thirds vote of the House of Representatives for conduct prejudicial to the public
interest. If Presidents or Vice-Presidents are to be tried, the Senate, as constituted, shall conduct the
trial. Judgments shall not extend beyond removal from office and disqualification for holding further
office; but the convicted official shall be liable to further prosecution.
SECTION 9. Members of legislative houses may be impeached by the Judicial Council; but for trials
it shall be enlarged to seventeen by Justices of the High Courts appointed by the Principal Justice. If
convicted, members shall be expelled and be ineligible for future public office; and they shall also be
 liable for trial as citizens. 
ARTICLE XI 
Amendment 
SECTION 1. It being the special duty of the Judicial Council to formulate and suggest amendments 
to this Constitution, it shall, from time to time, make proposals, through the Principal Justice, to the
Senate. The Senate, if it approve, and if the President agree, shall instruct the Overseer to arrange at 
the next national election for submission of the amendment to the electorate. If not disapproved by a 
majority, it shall become part of this Constitution. If rejected, it may be restudied and a new proposal
submitted.
It shall be the purpose of the amending procedure to correct deficiencies in the Constitution, to 
extend it when new responsibilities require, and to make government responsible to needs of the 
people, making use of advances in managerial competence and establishing security and stability; also 
to preclude changes in the Constitution resulting from interpretation.
SECTION 2. When this Constitution shall have been in effect for twenty-five years the Overseer
shall ask, by referendum whether a new Constitution shall be prepared. If a majority so decide, the
Council, making use of such advice as may be available, and consulting those who have made
complaint, shall prepare a new draft for submission at the next election. If not disapproved by a majority
it shall be in effect. If disapproved it shall be redrafted and resubmitted with such changes as may be 
then appropriate to the circumstances, and it shall be submitted to the voters at the following election.
If not disapproved by a majority it shall be in effect. If disapproved it shall be restudied and 
resubmitted.
ARTICLE XII 
Transition 
SECTION 1. The President is authorized to assume such powers, make such appointments, and use 
such funds as are necessary to make this Constitution effective as soon as possible after acceptance by a 
referendum he may initiate.
16
266 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
SECTION 2. Such members of the Senate as may be at once available shall convene and, if at least 
half, shall constitute sufficient membership while others are being added. They shall appoint an 
Overseer to arrange for electoral organization and elections for the offices of government; but the 
President and Vice-Presidents shall serve out their terms and then become members of the Senate. At 
that time the presidency shall be constituted as provided in this Constitution.
SECTION 3. Until each indicated change in the government shall have been completed the 
provisions of the existing Constitution and the organs of government shall be in effect.
SECTION 4. All operations of the national government shall cease as they are replaced by those 
authorized under this Constitution.
The President shall determine when replacement is complete.
The President shall cause to be constituted an appropriate commission to designate existing laws 
inconsistent with this Constitution, and they shall be void; also the commission shall assist the 
President and the legislative houses in the formulating of such laws as may be consistent with the 
Constitution and necessary to its implementation.
SECTION 5. For establishing Newstates' boundaries a commission of thirteen, appointed by the 
President, shall make recommendations within one year. For this purpose the members may take advice 
and commission studies concerning resources, population, transportation, communication, economic 
and social arrangements, and such other conditions as may be significant. The President shall transmit 
the commission's report to the Senate. After entertaining, if convenient, petitions for revision, the 
Senate shall report whether the recommendations are satisfactory but the President shall decide 
whether they shall be accepted or shall be returned for revision.
Existing states shall not be divided unless metropolitan areas extending over more than one state are 
to be included in one Newstate, or unless other compelling circumstances exist; and each Newstate 
shall possess harmonious regional characteristics.
The Commission shall continue while the Newstates make adjustments among themselves and shall 
have jurisdiction in disputes arising among them.
SECTION 6. Constitutions of the Newstates shall be established as arranged by the Judicial Council 
and the Principal Justice.
These procedures shall be as follows: Constitutions shall be drafted by the highest courts of the 
Newstates. There shall then be a convention of one hundred delegates chosen in special elections in a 
procedure approved by the Overseer. If the Constitution be not rejected, the Principal Justice, advised 
by the Judicial Council, shall promulgate a Constitution and initiate revisions to be submitted for 
approval at a time he shall appoint. If it again be rejected he shall promulgate another, taking account of 
objections, and it shall be in effect. A Constitution, once in effect, shall be valid for twenty-five years as 
herein provided.
SECTION 7. Until Governors and legislatures of the Newstates are seated, their governments shall 
continue, except that the President may appoint temporary Governors to act as executives until 
succeeded by those regularly elected. These Governors shall succeed to the executive functions of the 
states as they become one of the Newstates of America.
SECTION 8. The indicated appointments, elections, and other arrangements shall be made with all 
deliberate speed.
SECTION 9. The first Judicial Assembly for selecting a register for candidates for the Principal 
Justiceship of the Newstates of America shall be called by the incumbent Chief Justice immediately 
upon ratification.
SECTION 10. Newstates electing by referendum not to comply with recommendations of the 
Boundary Commission, as approved by the Senate, shall have deducted from taxes collected by the 
Newstates of America for transmission to them a percentage equal to the loss in efficiency from failure 
to comply.
Estimates shall be made by the Chancellor of Financial Affairs and approved by the President; but the 
deduction shall not be less than 7 percent.
SECTION 11. When this Constitution has been implemented the President may delete by 
proclamation appropriate parts of this article.



Chapter 15 Protocols of the Elders of Zion

Chapter 15
PROTOCOLS
OF THE
WISE MEN OF ZION
The Protocols of Zion were referred to in the late 1700s. The first copy 
available to public scrutiny surfaced in the early 1800s. Every aspect of this 
plan to subjugate the world has since become reality, validating the authenticity of conspiracy.
Author's Note: This is an exact reprint of the original text. 
This has been written intentionally to deceive people. For 
clear understanding, the word "Zion" should be "Sion"; any 
reference to "Jews" should be replaced with the word "Illuminati"; and the word "goyim" should be replaced with the 
word "cattle."
268 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
Here is "The Britons" translation of the complete text of the 
notorious Nilus "Protocols of the Wise Men of Zion."
PROTOCOLS OF THE MEETINGS OF THE LEARNED ELDERS OF ZION 
PROTOCOL NO. 1
. . . Putting aside fine phrases we shall speak of the significance 
of each thought: by comparisons and deductions we shall throw light 
upon surrounding facts.
What I am about to set forth, then, is our system from the two 
points of view, that of ourselves and that of the goyim (i.e., non-Jews).
It must be noted that men with bad instincts are more in number 
than the good, and therefore the best results in governing them are 
attained by violence and terrorisation, and not by academic discussions. 
Every man aims at power, everyone would like to become a dictator 
if only he could, and rare indeed are the men who would not be 
willing to sacrifice the welfare of all for the sake of securing their 
own welfare.
What has restrained the beasts of prey who are called men? What 
has served for their guidance hitherto?
In the beginnings of the structure of society they were subjected 
to brutal and blind force; afterwards—to Law, which is the same 
force, only disguised. I draw the conclusion that by the law of nature 
right lies in force.
Political freedom is an idea but not a fact. This idea one must 
know how to apply whenever it appears necessary with this bait of 
an idea to attract the masses of the people to one's party for the 
purpose of crushing another who is in authority. This task is rendered 
easier if the opponent has himself been infected with the idea of 
freedom, so-called liberalism, and, for the sake of an idea, is willing
Chapter 15 Protocols of the Wise Men of Zion 269
to yield some of his power. It is precisely here that the triumph of 
our theory appears: the slackened reins of government are immediately, 
by the law of life, caught up and gathered together by a new hand, 
because the blind might of the nation cannot for one single day exist 
without guidance, and the new authority merely fits into the place 
of the old already weakened by liberalism.
In our day the power which has replaced that of the rulers who 
were liberal is the power of Gold. Time was when Faith ruled. The 
idea of freedom is impossible of realisation because no one knows how 
to use it with moderation. It is enough to hand over a people to selfgovernment for a certain length of time for that people to be turned 
into a disorganised mob. From that moment on we get internecine 
strife which soon develops into battles between classes, in the midst 
of which States burn down and their importance is reduced to that 
of a heap of ashes.
Whether a State exhausts itself in its own convulsions, whether its 
internal discord brings it under the power of external foes—in any 
case it can be accounted irretrievably lost: it is in our power. The 
despotism of Capital, which is entirely in our hands, reaches out to it 
a straw that the State, willy-nilly, must take hold of: if not—it goes 
to the bottom.
Should anyone of a liberal mind say that such reflections as the 
above are immoral I would put the following questions:—If every 
State has two foes and if in regard to the external foe it is allowed 
and not considered immoral to use every manner and art of conflict, 
as for example to keep the enemy in ignorance of plans of attack and 
defence, to attack him by night or in superior numbers, then in what 
way can the same means in regard to a worse foe, the destroyer of the 
structure of society and the commonweal, be called immoral and not 
permissible?
Is it possible for any sound logical mind to hope with any success 
to guide crowds by the aid of reasonable counsels and arguments, when 
any objection or contradiction, senseless though it may be, can be 
made and when such objection may find more favour with the people 
whose powers of reasoning are superficial? Men in masses and the men 
of the masses, being guided solely by petty passions, paltry beliefs 
customs, traditions and sentimental theorism, fall a prey to party distention, which hinders any kind of agreement even on the basis of a
270 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
perfectly reasonable argument. Every resolution of a crowd depends 
upon a chance or packed majority, which, in its ignorance of political 
secrets, puts forth some ridiculous resolution that lays in the administration a seed of anarchy.
The political has nothing in common with the moral. The ruler 
who is governed by the moral is not a skilled politician, and is therefore unstable on his throne. He who wishes to rule must have recourse 
both to cunning and to make-believe. Great national qualities, like 
frankness and honesty, are vices in politics, for they bring down rulers 
from their thrones more effectively and more certainly than the most 
powerful enemy. Such qualities must be the attributes of the kingdoms 
of the goyim, but we must in no wise be guided by them.
Our right lies in force. The word "right" is an abstract thought 
and proved by nothing. The word means no more than:—Give me 
what I want in order that thereby I might have a proof that I am 
stronger than you.
Where does right begin? Where does it end?
In any State in which there is a bad organisation of authority, an 
impersonality of laws and of the rulers who have lost their personality 
amid the flood of rights ever multiplying out of liberalism, I find 
a new right—to attack by the right of the strong, and to scatter to 
the winds all existing forces of order and regulation, to reconstruct 
all institutions and to become the sovereign lord of those who have 
left to us the rights of their power by laying them down voluntarily 
in their liberalism.
Our power in the present tottering condition of all forms of power 
will be more invincible than any other, because it will remain invisible 
until the moment when it has gained such strength that no cunning 
can any longer undermine it.
Out of the temporary evil we are now compelled to commit will 
emerge the good of an unshakeable rule, which will restore the regular 
course of the machinery of the national life, brought to naught by 
liberalism. The result justifies the means. Let us, however, in our plans, 
direct our attention not so much to what is good and moral as to what 
is necessary and useful.
Before us is a plan in which is laid down strategically the line 
from which we cannot deviate without running the risk of seeing the 
labour of many centuries brought to naught.
Chapter 15 Protocols of the Wise Men of Zion • 271
In order to elaborate satisfactory forms of action it is necessary to 
have regard to the rascality, the slackness, the instability of the mob, 
its lack of capacity to understand and respect the conditions of its own 
life, or its own welfare. It must be understood that the might of a 
mob is blind, senseless and unreasoning force ever at the mercy of a 
suggestion from any side. The blind cannot lead the blind without 
bringing them into the abyss; consequently, members of the mob, 
upstarts from the people even though they should be as a genius for 
wisdom, yet having no understanding of the political, cannot come 
forward as leaders of the mob without bringing the whole nation 
to ruin.
Only one trained from childhood for independent rule can have 
understanding of the words that can be made up of the political 
alphabet.
A people left to itself, i.e., to upstarts from its midst, brings itself 
to ruin by party dissensions excited by the pursuit of power and 
honours and disorders arising therefrom. Is it possible for the masses 
of the people calmly and without petty jealousies to form judgments, 
to deal with the affairs of the country, which cannot be mixed up 
with personal interests? Can they defend themselves from an external 
foe? It is unthinkable, for a plan broken up into as many parts as there 
are heads in the mob, loses all homogeneity, and thereby becomes 
unintelligible and impossible of execution.
It is only with a despotic ruler that plans can be elaborated extensively and clearly in such a way as to distribute the whole properly 
among the several parts of the machinery of the State: from this the 
conclusion is inevitable that a satisfactory form of government for 
any country is one that concentrates in the hands of one responsible 
person. Without an absolute despotism there can be no existence for 
civilisation which is carried on not by the masses but by their guide, 
whosoever that person may be. The mob is a savage and displays its 
savagery at every opportunity. The moment the mob seizes freedom 
in its hands it quickly turns to anarchy, which in itself is the highest 
degree of savagery.
Behold the alcoholised animals, bemused with drink, the right to 
an immoderate use of which comes along with freedom. It is not for 
us and ours to walk that road. The peoples of the goyim are bemused 
with alcoholic liquors; their youth has grown stupid on classicism and
272 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
from early immorality, into which it has been inducted by our special 
agents—by tutors, lackeys, governesses in the houses of the wealthy, 
by clerks and others, by our women in the places of dissipation frequented by the goyim. In the number of these last I count also the 
so-called "society ladies," voluntary followers of the others in corruption and luxury.
Our countersign is—Force and Make-believe. Only force conquers 
in political affairs, especially if it be concealed in the talents essential 
to statesmen. Violence must be the principle, and cunning and makebelieve the rule for governments which do not want to lay down their 
crowns at the feet of agents of some new power. This evil is the one 
and only means to attain the end, the good. Therefore we must not 
stop at bribery, deceit and treachery when they should serve towards 
the attainment of our end. In politics one must know how to seize the 
property of others without hesitation if by it we secure submission 
and sovereignty.
Our State, marching along the path of peaceful conquest, has the 
right to replace the horrors of war by less noticeable and more satisfactory sentences of death, necessary to maintain the terror which 
tends to produce blind submission. Just but merciless severity is the 
greatest factor of strength in the State: not only for the sake of gain 
but also in the name of duty, for the sake of victory, we must keep 
to the programme of violence and make-believe. The doctrine of 
squaring accounts is precisely as strong as the means of which it makes 
use. Therefore it is not so much by the means themselves as by the 
doctrine of severity that we shall triumph and bring all governments 
into subjection to our super-government. It is enough for them to 
know that we are merciless for all disobedience to cease.
Far back in ancient times we were the first to cry among the masses 
of the people the words "Liberty, Equality, Fraternity," words many 
times repeated since those days by stupid poll-parrots who from all 
sides round flew down upon these baits and with them carried away 
the well-being of the world, true freedom of the individual, formerly 
so well guarded against the pressure of the mob. The would-be wise 
men of the goyim, the intellectuals, could not make anything out of 
the uttered words in their abstractness; did not note the contradiction 
of their meaning and inter-relation: did not see that in nature there 
is no equality, cannot be freedom: that Nature herself has established
Chapter 15 Protocols of the Wise Men of Zion • 273
inequality of minds, of characters, and capacities, just as immutably 
as she has established subordination to her laws: never stopped to think 
that the mob is a blind thing, that upstarts elected from among it to 
bear rule are, in regard to the political, the same blind men as the 
mob itself, that the adept, though he be a fool, can yet rule, whereas 
the non-adept, even if he were a genius, understands nothing in the 
political—to all these things the goyim paid no regard; yet all the time 
it was based upon these things that dynastic rule rested: the father 
passed on to the son a knowledge of the course of political affairs in 
such wise that none should know it but members of the dynasty and 
none could betray it to the governed. As time went on the meaning 
of the dynastic transference of the true position of affairs in the political was lost, and this aided the success of our cause.
In all corners of the earth the words "Liberty, Equality, Fraternity" 
brought to our ranks, thanks to our blind agents, whole legions who 
bore our banners with enthusiasm. And all the time these words were 
canker-worms at work boring into the well-being of the goyim, putting 
an end everywhere to peace, quiet, solidarity and destroying all the 
foundations of the goy States. As you will see later, this helped us 
to our triumph; it gave us the possibility, among other things, of 
getting into our hands the master card—the destruction of the privileges, or in other words of the very existence of the aristocracy of 
the goyim, that class which was the only defence peoples and countries 
had against us. On the ruins of the natural and genealogical aristocracy 
of the goyim we have set up the aristocracy of our educated class 
headed by the aristocracy of money. The qualifications for this aristocracy we have established in wealth, which is dependent upon us, 
and in knowledge, for which our learned elders provide the motive 
force.
Our triumph has been rendered easier by the fact that in our relations with the men whom we wanted we have always worked upon 
the most sensitive chords of the human mind, upon the cash account, 
upon the cupidity, upon the insatiability for material needs of man; 
and each one of these human weaknesses, taken alone, is sufficient to 
paralyse initiative, for it hands over the will of men to the disposition 
of him who has bought their activities.
The abstraction of freedom has enabled us to persuade the mob in 
all countries that their government is nothing but the steward of the
274 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
people who are the owners of the country, and that the steward may 
be replaced like a worn-out glove.
It is this possibility of replacing the representatives of the people 
which has placed them at our disposal, and, as it were, given us the 
power of appointment.
PROTOCOL NO. 2
It is indispensable for our purpose that wars, so far as possible, 
should not result in territorial gains: war will thus be brought on to 
the economic ground, where the nations will not fail to perceive in 
the assistance we give the strength of our predominance, and this state 
of things will put both sides at the mercy of our international agentur; 
which possesses millions of eyes ever on the watch and unhampered 
by any limitations whatsoever. Our international rights will then wipe 
out national rights, in the proper sense of right, and will rule the 
nations precisely as the civil law of States rules the relations of their 
subjects among themselves.
The administrators, whom we shall choose from among the public, 
with strict regard to their capacities for servile obedience, will not be 
persons trained in the arts of government, and will therefore easily 
become pawns in our game in the hands of men of learning and genius 
who will be their advisers, specialists bred and reared from early 
childhood to rule the affairs of the whole world. As is well known 
to you, these specialists of ours have been drawing to fit them for 
rule the information they need from our political plans, from the 
lessons of history, from observations made of the events of every 
moment as it passes. The goyim are not guided by practical use of 
unprejudiced historical observation, but by theoretical routine without 
any critical regard for consequent results. We need not, therefore, 
take any account of them—let them amuse themselves until the hour 
strikes, or live on hopes of new forms of enterprising pastime, or on 
the memories of all they have enjoyed. For them let that play the 
principal part which we have persuaded them to accept as the dictates 
of science (theory). It is with this object in view that we are constantly, by means of our press, arousing a blind confidence in these 
theories. The intellectuals of the goyim will puff themselves up with 
their knowledge and without any logical verification of it will put
Chapter 15 Protocols of the Wise Men of Zion • 275
into effect all the information available from science, which our 
agentur specialists have cunningly pieced together for the purpose of 
educating their minds in the direction we want.
Do not suppose for a moment that these statements are empty words: 
think carefully of the successes we arranged for Darwinism, Marxism, 
Nietzsche-ism. To us Jews, at any rate, it should be plain to see what 
a disintegrating importance these directives have had upon the minds 
of the goyim.
It is indispensable for us to take account of the thoughts, characters, 
tendencies of the nations in order to avoid making slips in the political 
and in the direction of administrative affairs. The triumph of our 
system, of which the component parts of the machinery may be variously disposed according to the temperament of the peoples met on 
our way, will fail of success if the practical application of it be not 
based upon a summing up of the lessons of the past in the light of 
the present.
In the hands of the States of to-day there is a great force that 
creates the movement of thought in the people, and that is the Press. 
The part played by the Press is to keep pointing out requirements 
supposed to be indispensable, to give voice to the complaints of the 
people, to express and to create discontent. It is in the Press that the 
triumph of freedom of speech finds its incarnation. But the goyim 
States have not known how to make use of this force; and it has fallen 
into our hands. Through the Press we have gained the power to 
influence while remaining ourselves in the shade; thanks to the Press 
we have got the gold in our hands, notwithstanding that we have had 
to gather it out of oceans of blood and tears. But it has paid us, though 
we have sacrificed many of our people. Each victim on our side is 
worth in the sight of God a thousand goyim.
PROTOCOL NO. 3
To-day I may tell you that our goal is now only a few steps off. 
There remains a small space to cross and the whole long path we have 
trodden is ready now to close its cycle of the Symbolic Snake, by which 
we symbolise our people. When this ring closes, all the States of 
Europe will be locked in its coil as in a powerful vice.
The constitution scales of these days will shortly break down, for 
we have established them with a certain lack of accurate balance in
276 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
order that they may oscillate incessantly until they wear through the 
pivot on which they turn. The goyim are under the impression that 
they have welded them sufficiently strong and they have all along kept 
on expecting that the scales would come into equilibrium. But the 
pivots—the kings on their thrones—are hemmed in by their representatives, who play the fool, distraught with their own uncontrolled and 
irresponsible power. This power they owe to the terror which has 
been breathed into the palaces. As they have no means of getting at 
their people, into their very midst, the kings on their thrones are no 
longer able to come to terms with them and so strengthen themselves 
against seekers after power. We have made a gulf between the farseeing Sovereign Power and the blind force of the people so that both 
have lost all meaning, for like the blind man and his stick, both are 
powerless apart.
In order to incite seekers after power to a misuse of power we have 
set all forces in opposition one to another, breaking up their liberal 
tendencies towards independence. To this end we have stirred up every 
form of enterprise, we have armed all parties, we have set up authority 
as a target for every ambition. Of States we have made gladiatorial 
arenas where a host of confused issues contend .... A little more, 
and disorders and bankruptcy will be universal. . . .
Babblers inexhaustible have turned into oratorical contests the sittings of Parliament and Administrative Boards. Bold journalists and 
unscrupulous pamphleteers daily fall upon executive officials. Abuses 
of power will put the final touch in preparing all institutions for 
their overthrow and everything will fly skyward under the blows of 
the maddened mob.
All people are chained down to heavy toil by poverty more firmly 
than ever they were chained by slavery and serfdom; from these, one 
way and another, they might free themselves, these could be settled 
with, but from want they will never get away. We have included 
in the constitution such rights as to the masses appear fictitious and not 
actual rights. All these so-called "People's Rights" can exist only in 
idea, an idea which can never be realised in practical life. What is it 
to the proletariat labourer, bowed double over his heavy toil, crushed 
by his lot in life, if talkers get the right to babble, if journalists get 
the right to scribble any nonsense side by side with good stuff, once 
the proletariat has no other profit out of the constitution save only
Chapter 15 Protocols of the Wise Men of Zion • 277
those pitiful crumbs which we fling them from our table in return 
for their voting in favour of what we dictate, in favour of the men 
we place in power, the servants of our agentur. . . . Republican rights 
for a poor man are no more than a bitter piece of irony, for the 
necessity he is under of toiling almost all day gives him no present 
use of them, but on the other hand robs him of all guarantee of regular 
and certain earnings by making him dependent on strikes by his comrades or lockouts by his masters.
The people under our guidance have annihilated the aristocracy, 
who were their one and only defence and foster-mother for the sake 
of their own advantage which is inseparably bound up with the wellbeing of the people. Nowadays, with the destruction of the aristocracy, 
the people have fallen into the grips of merciless money-grinding 
scoundrels who have laid a pitiless and cruel yoke upon the necks of 
the workers.
We appear on the scene as alleged saviours of the worker from this 
oppression when we propose to him to enter the ranks of our fighting 
forces—Socialists, Anarchists, Communists—to whom we always give 
support in accordance with an alleged brotherly rule (of the solidarity 
of all humanity) of our social masonry. The aristocracy, which enjoyed 
by law the labour of the workers, was interested in seeing that the 
workers were well fed, healthy and strong. We are interested in just 
the opposite—in the diminution, the killing out of the GOYIM. Our 
power is in the chronic shortness of food and physical weakness of the 
worker because by all that this implies he is made the slave of our 
will, and he will not find in his own authorities either strength or 
energy to set against our will. Hunger creates the right of capital 
to rule the worker more surely than it was given to the aristocracy by 
the legal authority of kings.
By want and the envy and hatred which it engenders we shall move 
the mobs and with their hands we shall wipe out all those who hinder 
us on our way.
When the hour strikes for our Sovereign Lord of all the World to 
be crowned it is these same hands which will sweef away everything 
that might be a hindrance thereto.
The goyim have lost the habit of thinking unless prompted by the 
suggestions of our specialists. Therefore they do not see the urgent 
necessity of what we, when our kingdom comes, shall adopt at once,
278 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
namely this, that it is essential to teach in national schools one simple, 
true piece of knowledge, the basis of all knowledge—the knowledge of 
the structure of human life, of social existence, which requires division of 
labour, and, consequently, the division of men into classes and conditions. 
It is essential for all to know that owing to difference in the objects 
of human activity there cannot be any equality, that he who by any 
act of his compromises a whole class cannot be equally responsible 
before the law with him who affects no one but only his own honour. 
The true knowledge of the structure of society, into the secrets of 
which we do not admit the goyim, would demonstrate to all men that 
the positions and work must be kept within a certain circle, that they 
may not become a source of human suffering, arising from an education 
which does not correspond with the work which individuals are called 
upon to do. After a thorough study of this knowledge the peoples will 
voluntarily submit to authority and accept such position as is appointed 
them in the State. In the present state of knowledge and the direction 
we have given to its development the people, blindly believing things 
in print—cherishes—thanks to promptings intended to mislead and to 
its own ignorance—a blind hatred towards all conditions which it 
considers above itself, for it has no understanding of the meaning of 
class and condition.
This hatred will be still further magnified by the effects of an 
economic crisis, which will stop dealings on the exchanges and bring 
industry to a standstill. We shall create by all the secret subterranean 
methods open to us and with the aid of gold, which is all in our hands, 
a universal economic crisis whereby we shall throw upon the streets 
whole mobs of workers simultaneously in all the countries of Europe. 
These mobs will rush delightedly to shed the blood of those whom, 
in the simplicity of their ignorance, they have envied from their 
cradles, and whose property they will then be able to loot.
"Ours" they will not touch, because the moment of attack will be 
known to us and we shall take measures to protect our own.
We have demonstrated that progress will bring all the goyim to 
the sovereignty of reason. Our despotism will be precisely that; for 
it will know how by wise severities to pacificate all unrest, to cauterise 
liberalism out of all institutions.
When the populace has seen that all sorts of concessions and indulgences are yielded it in the name of freedom it has imagined itself
Chapter l5 Protocols of the Wise Men of Zion • 279
to be sovereign lord and has stormed its way to power, but, naturally, 
like every other blind man it has come upon a host of stumbling 
blocks, it has rushed to find a guide, it has never had the sense to 
return to the former state and it has laid down its plenipotentiary 
powers at our feet. Remember the French Revolution, to which it was 
we who gave the name of "Great": the secrets of its preparations are well 
known to us for it was wholly the work of our hands.
Ever since that time we have been leading the peoples from one 
disenchantment to another, so that in the end they should turn also 
from us in favour of that King-Despot of the blood of Zion, whom 
we are preparing for the world.
At the present day we are, as an international force, invincible, 
because if attacked by some we are supported by other States. It is 
the bottomless rascality of the goyim peoples, who crawl on their 
bellies to force, but are merciless towards weakness, unsparing to 
faults and indulgent to crimes, unwilling to bear the contradictions 
of a free social system but patient unto martyrdom under the violence 
of a bold despotism—it is those qualities which are aiding us to 
independence. From the premier-dictators of the present day the goyim 
peoples suffer patiently and bear such abuses as for the least of them 
they would have beheaded twenty kings.
What is the explanation of this phenomenon, this curious inconsequence of the masses of the peoples in their attitude towards what 
would appear to be events of the same order?
It is explained by the fact that these dictators whisper to the peoples 
through their agents that through these abuses they are inflicting 
injury on the States with the highest purpose—to secure the welfare 
of the peoples, the international brotherhood of them all, their 
solidarity and equality of rights. Naturally they do not tell the peoples 
that this unification must be accomplished only under our sovereign 
rule.
And thus the people condemn the upright and acquit the guilty, 
persuaded ever more and more that it can do whatsoever it wishes. 
Thanks to this state of things the people are destroying every kind 
of stability and creating disorders at every step.
The word "freedom" brings out the communities of men to fight 
against every kind of force, against every kind of authority, even
280 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
against God and the laws of nature. For this reason we, when we come 
into our kingdom, shall have to erase this word from the lexicon of 
life as implying a principle of brute force which turns mobs into 
bloodthirsty beasts.
These beasts, it is true, fall asleep again every time when they 
have drunk their fill of blood, and at such times can easily be riveted 
into their chains. But if they be not given blood they will not sleep 
and continue to struggle.
PROTOCOL NO. 4
Every republic passes through several stages. The first of these is 
comprised in the early days of mad raging by the blind mob, tossed 
hither and thither, right and left: the second is demagogy, from which 
is born anarchy, and that leads inevitably to despotism—not any longer 
legal and overt, and therefore responsible despotism, but to unseen 
and secretly hidden, yet nevertheless sensibly felt despotism in the 
hands of some secret organisation or other, whose acts are the more 
unscrupulous inasmuch as it works behind a screen, behind the backs 
of all sorts of agents, the changing of whom not only does not 
injuriously affect but actually aids the secret force by saving it, thanks 
to continual changes, from the necessity of expending its resources on 
the rewarding of long services.
Who and what is in a position to overthrow an invisible force? And 
this is precisely what our force is. Gentile masonry blindly serves as 
a screen for us and our objects, but the plan of action of our force, 
even its very abiding-place, remains for the whole people an unknown 
mystery.
But even freedom might be harmless and have its place in the State 
economy without injury to the well-being of the peoples if it rested 
upon the foundation of faith in God, upon the brotherhood of 
humanity, unconnected with the conception of equality, which is 
negatived by the very laws of creation, for they have established subordination. With such a faith as this a people might be governed by 
a wardship of parishes, and would walk contentedly and humbly under 
the guiding hand of its spiritual pastor submitting to the dispositions 
of God upon earth. This is the reason why it is indispensable for us
Chapter 15 Protocols of the Wise Men of Zion • 281
to undermine all faith, to tear out of the minds of the GOYIM the 
very principle of Godhead and the spirit, and to put in its place 
arithmetical calculations and material needs.
In order to give the goyim no time to think and take note, their 
minds must be diverted towards industry and trade. Thus, all the 
nations will be swallowed up in the pursuit of gain and in the race 
for it will not take note of their common foe. But again, in order 
that freedom may once for all disintegrate and ruin the communities 
of the goyim, we must put industry on a speculative basis: the result 
of this will be that what is withdrawn from the land by industry will 
slip through the hands and pass into speculation, that is, to our classes.
The intensified struggle for superiority and shocks delivered to economic life will create, nay, have already created, disenchanted, cold 
and heartless communities. Such communities will foster a strong 
aversion towards the higher political and towards religion. Their only 
guide is gain, that is Gold, which they will erect into a veritable 
cult, for the sake of those material delights which it can give. Then 
will the hour strike when, not for the sake of attaining the good, not 
even to win wealth, but solely out of hatred towards the privileged, 
the lower classes of the goyim will follow our lead against our rivals 
for power, the intellectuals of the goyim.
PROTOCOL NO. 5
What form of administrative rule can be given to communities in 
which corruption has penetrated everywhere, communities where riches 
are attained only by the clever surprise tactics of semi-swindling 
tricks; where looseness reigns: where morality is maintained by penal 
measures and harsh laws but not by voluntary accepted principles: 
where the feelings towards faith and country are obliterated by cosmopolitan convictions? What form of rule is to be given to these 
communities if not that despotism which I shall describe to you 
later? We shall create an intensified centralisation of government 
in order to grip in our hands all the forces of the community. 
We shall regulate mechanically all the actions of the political life 
of our subjects by new laws. These laws will withdraw one by one 
all the indulgences and liberties which have been permitted by the 
goyim, and our kingdom will be distinguished by a despotism of such
282 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
magnificent proportions as to be at any moment and in every place in 
a position to wipe out any goyim who oppose us by deed or word.
We shall be told that such a despotism as I speak of is not consistent with the progress of these days, but I will prove to you that it is. 
In the times when the peoples looked upon kings on their thrones 
as on a pure manifestation of the will of God, they submitted without 
a murmur to the despotic power of kings: but from the day when we 
insinuated into their minds the conception of their own rights they 
began to regard the occupants of thrones as mere ordinary mortals. 
The holy unction of the Lord's Anointed has fallen from the heads 
of kings in the eyes of the people, and when we also robbed them of 
their faith in God the might of power was flung upon the streets 
into the place of public proprietorship and was seized by us.
Moreover, the art of directing masses and individuals by means of 
cleverly manipulated theory and verbiage, by regulations of life in 
common and all sorts of other quirks, in all which the goyim understand nothing, belongs likewise to the specialists of our administrative 
brain. Reared on analysis, observation, on delicacies of fine calculation, 
in this species of skill we have no rivals, any more than we have 
either in the drawing up of plans of political actions and solidarity. 
In this respect the Jesuits alone might have compared with us, but we 
have contrived to discredit them in the eyes of the unthinking mob as 
an overt organisation, while we ourselves all the while have kept our 
secret organisation in the shade. However, it is probably all the same 
to the world who is its sovereign lord, whether the head of Catholicism 
or our despot of the blood of Zion! But to us, the Chosen People, 
it is very far from being a matter of indifference.
For a time perhaps we might be successfully dealt with by a coalition 
of the GOYIM of all the world: but from this danger we are secured 
by the discord existing among them whose roots are so deeply seated 
that they can never now be plucked up. We have set one against another 
the personal and national reckonings of the goyim, religious and race 
hatreds, which we have fostered into a huge growth in the course of 
the past twenty centuries. This is the reason why there is not one 
State which would anywhere receive support if it were to raise its arm, 
for every one of them must bear in mind that any agreement against 
us would be unprofitable to itself. We are too strong—there is no
Chapter 15 Protocols of the Wise Men of Zion • 283
evading our power. The nations cannot come to even an inconsiderable 
private agreement without our secretly having a hand in it.
Per Me reges regnant. "It is through Me that Kings reign." And 
it was said by the prophets that we were chosen by God Himself to 
rule over the whole earth. God has endowed us with genius that we 
may be equal to our task. Were genius in the opposite camp it would 
still struggle against us, but even so a newcomer is no match for the 
old-established settler: the struggle would be merciless between us, 
such a fight as the world has never yet seen. Aye, and the genius on 
their side would have arrived too late. All the wheels of the machinery 
of all States go by the force of the engine, which is in our hands, and 
that engine of the machinery of States is—Gold. The science of 
political economy invented by our learned elders has for long past 
been giving royal prestige to capital.
Capital, if it is to co-operate untrammelled, must be free to establish 
a monopoly of industry and trade: this is already being put in execution by an unseen hand in all quarters of the world. This freedom 
will give political force to those engaged in industry, and that will 
help to oppress the people. Nowadays it is more important to disarm 
the peoples than to lead them into war: more important to use for 
our advantage the passions which have burst into flames than to quench 
their fire: more important to catch up and interpret the ideas of others 
to suit ourselves than to eradicate them. The principal object of our 
directorate consists in this: to debilitate the public mind by criticism; 
to lead it away from serious reflections calculated to arouse resistance; 
to distract the forces of the mind towards a sham fight of empty 
eloquence.
In all ages the peoples of the world, equally with individuals, have 
accepted words for deeds, for they are content with a show and 
rarely pause to note, in the public arena, whether promises are followed 
by performance. Therefore we shall establish show institutions which 
will give eloquent proof of their benefit to progress.
We shall assume to ourselves the liberal physiognomy of all parties, 
of all directions, and we shall give that physiognomy a voice in orators 
who will speak so much that they will exhaust the patience of their 
hearers and produce an abhorrence of oratory.
In order to put public opinion into our hands we must bring it into
284 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
a state of bewilderment by giving expression from all sides to so many 
contradictory opinions and for such length of time as will suffice to 
make the GOYIM lose their heads in the labyrinth and come to see that 
the best thing is to have no opinion of any kind in matters political, 
which it is not given to the public to understand, because they are 
understood only by him who guides the public. This is the first secret. 
The second secret requisite for the success of our government is 
comprised in the following: To multiply to such an extent national 
failings, habits, passions, conditions of civil life, that it will be 
impossible for anyone to know where he is in the resulting chaos, so 
that the people in consequence will fail to understand one another. 
This measure will also serve us in another way, namely, to sow discord 
in all parties, to dislocate all collective forces which are still unwilling 
to submit to us, and to discourage any kind of personal initiative which 
might in any degree hinder our affair. There is nothing more dangerous than personal initiative; if it has genius behind it, such initiative 
can do more than can be done by millions of people among whom 
we have sown discord. We must so direct the education of the goyim 
communities that whenever they come upon a matter requiring initiative they may drop their hands in despairing impotence. The strain 
which results from freedom of action saps the forces when it meets 
with the freedom of another. From this collision arise grave moral 
shocks, disenchantments, failures. By all these means toe shall so wear 
down the goyim that they will be compelled to offer us international 
power of a nature that by its position will enable us without any 
violence gradually to absorb all the State forces of the world and to 
form a Super-Government. In place of the rulers of to-day we shall 
set up a bogey which will be called the Super-Government Administration. Its hands will reach out in all directions like nippers and 
its organisation will be of such colossal dimensions that it cannot fail 
to subdue all the nations of the world.
PROTOCOL NO. 6
We shall soon begin to establish huge monopolies, reservoirs of 
colossal riches, upon which even large fortunes of the goyim will 
depend to such an extent that they will go to the bottom together with
Chapter 15 Protocols of the Wise Men of Zion • 285
the credit of the States on the day after the political smash. . . .
You gentlemen here present who are economists, just strike an 
estimate of the significance of this combination! . . .
In every possible way we must develop the significance of our 
Super-Government by representing it as the Protector and Benefactor 
of all those who voluntarily submit to us.
The aristocracy of the goyim as a political force, is dead—we need 
not take it into account; but as landed proprietors they can still be 
harmful to us from the fact that they are self-sufficing in the resources 
upon which they live. It is essential therefore for us at whatever cost 
to deprive them of their land. This object will be best attained by 
increasing the burdens upon landed property—in loading lands with 
debts. These measures will check land-holding and keep it in a state 
of humble and unconditional submission.
The aristocrats of the goyim, being hereditarily incapable of contenting themselves with little, will rapidly burn up and fizzle out.
At the same time we must intensively patronise trade and industry, 
but, first and foremost, speculation, the part played by which is to 
provide a counterpoise to industry: the absence of speculative industry 
will multiply capital in private hands and will serve to restore agriculture by freeing the land from indebtedness to the land banks. 
What we want is that industry should drain off from the land both 
labour and capital and by means of speculation transfer into our hands 
all the money of the world, and thereby throw all the goyim into 
the ranks of the proletariat. Then the goyim will bow down before 
us, if for no other reason but to get the right to exist.
To complete the ruin of the industry of the goyim we shall bring 
to the assistance of speculation the luxury which we have developed 
among the goyim, that greedy demand for luxury which is swallowing 
up everything. We shall raise the rate of wages which, however, will 
not bring any advantage to the workers, for, at the same time, we 
shall produce a rise in prices of the first necessaries of life, alleging 
that it arises from the decline of agriculture and cattle-breeding: we 
shall further undermine artfully and deeply sources of production, by 
accustoming the workers to anarchy and to drunkenness and side by side 
therewith taking all measure to extirpate from the face of the earth 
all the educated forces of the GOYIM.
In order that the true meaning of things may not strike the GOYIM
286 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
before the proper time we shall mask it under an alleged ardent desire 
to serve the working classes and the great principles of political economy about which our economic theories are carrying on an energetic 
propaganda.
PROTOCOL NO. 7
The intensification of armaments, the increase of police forces— 
are all essential for the completion of the aforementioned plans. 
What we have to get at is that there should be in all the States of the 
world, besides ourselves, only the masses of the proletariat, a few 
millionaires devoted to our interests, police and soldiers.
Throughout all Europe, and by means of relations with Europe, 
in other continents also, we must create ferments, discords and hostility. Therein we gain a double advantage. In the first place we keep 
in check all countries, for they well know that we have the power 
whenever we like to create disorders or to restore order. All these 
countries are accustomed to see in us an indispensable force of coercion. 
In the second place, by our intrigues we shall tangle up all the threads 
which we have stretched into the cabinets of all States by means of 
politics, by economic treaties, or loan obligations. In order to succeed 
in this we must use great cunning and penetration during negotiations and agreements, but, as regards what is called the "official 
language," we shall keep to the opposite tactics and assume the mask 
of honesty and compliancy. In this way the peoples and governments 
of the goyim, whom we have taught to look only at the outside of whatever we present to their notice, will still continue to accept us as the 
benefactors and saviours of the human race.
We must be in a position to respond to every act of opposition by 
war with the neighbours of that country which dares to oppose us: 
but if these neighbours should also venture to stand collectively together 
against us, then we must offer resistance by a universal war.
The principal factor of success in the political is the secrecy of its 
undertakings: the word should not agree with the deeds of the diplomat.
We must compel the governments of the goyim to take action in 
the direction favoured by our widely conceived plan, already approaching the desired consummation, by what we shall represent as 
public opinion, secretly prompted by us through the means of that
Chapter 15 Protocols of the Wise Men of Zion • 287
so-called "Great Power"—the Press, which, with a few exceptions 
that may be disregarded, is already entirely in our hands.
In a word, to sum up our system of keeping the governments of the 
goyim in Europe in check, we shall show our strength to one of them 
by terrorist attempts and to all, if we allow the possibility of a general 
rising against us, we shall respond with the guns of America or China 
or Japan.
PROTOCOL NO. 8
We must arm ourselves with all the weapons which our opponents 
might employ against us. We must search out in the very finest shades 
of expression and the knotty points of the lexicon of law justification 
for those cases where we shall have to pronounce judgments that might 
appear abnormally audacious and unjust, for it is important that these 
resolutions should be set forth in expressions that shall seem to be 
the most exalted moral principles cast into legal form. Our directorate 
must surround itself with all these forces of civilisation among which 
it will have to Work. It will surround itself with publicists, practical 
jurists, administrators, diplomats and, finally, with persons prepared 
by a special super-educational training in our sfecial schools. These 
persons will have cognisance of all the secrets of the social structure, 
they will know all the languages that can be made up by political 
alphabets and words; they will be made acquainted with the whole 
underside of human nature, with all its sensitive chords on which 
they will have to play. These chords are the cast of mind of the goyim, 
their tendencies, shortcomings, vices and qualities, the particularities 
of classes and conditions. Needless to say that the talented assistants 
of authority, of whom I speak, will be taken not from among the 
goyim, who are accustomed to perform their administrative work without giving themselves the trouble to think what its aim is, and never 
consider what it is needed for. The administrators of the goyim sign 
papers without reading them, and they serve either for mercenary 
reasons or from ambition.
We shall surround our government with a whole world of economists. That is the reason why economic sciences form the principal 
subject of the teaching given to the Jews. Around us again will be 
a whole constellation of bankers, industrialists, capitalists and—the
288 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
main thing—millionaires, because in substance everything will be settled by the question of figures.
For a time, until there will no longer be any risk in entrusting 
responsible posts in our States to our brother-Jews, we shall put them 
in the hands of persons whose past and reputation are such that 
between them and the people lies an abyss, persons who, in case of 
disobedience to our instructions, must face criminal charges or disappear—this in order to make them defend our interest to their last 
gasp.
PROTOCOL NO. 9
In applying our principles let attention be paid to the character of 
the people in whose country you live and act; a general, identical 
application of them, until such time as the people shall have been 
re-educated to our pattern, cannot have success. But by approaching 
their application cautiously you will see that not a decade will pass before 
the most stubborn character will change and we shall add a new 
people to the ranks of those already subdued by us.
The words of the liberal, which are in effect the words of our 
masonic watchword, namely, "Liberty, Equality, Fraternity," will, 
when we come into our kingdom, be changed by us into words no 
longer of a watchword, but only an expression of idealism, namely, 
into: "The" right of liberty, the duty of equality, the ideal of brotherhood." That is how we shall put it,—and so we shall catch the bull 
by the horns. . . . De facto we have already wiped out every kind of 
rule except our own, although de jure there still remain a good many 
of them. Nowadays, if any States raise a protest against us it is only 
pro forma at our discretion and by our direction, for their antiSemitism is indisfensable to us for the management of our lesser 
brethren. I will not enter into further explanations, for this matter has 
formed the subject of repeated discussions amongst us.
For us there are no checks to limit the range of our activity. Our 
Super-Government subsists in extra-legal conditions which are described 
in the accepted terminology by the energetic and forcible word— 
Dictatorship. I am in a position to tell you with a clear conscience that 
at the proper time we, the law-givers, shall execute judgment and 
sentence, we shall slay and we shall spare, we, as head of all our
Chapter 15 Protocols of the Wise Men of Zion • 289
troops, are mounted on the steed of the leader. We rule by force of 
will, because in our hands are the fragments of a once powerful party, 
now vanquished by us. And the weapons in our hands are limitless 
ambitions, burning greediness, merciless vengeance, hatreds and malice.
It is from us that the all-engulfing terror proceeds. We have in 
our service fersons of all opinions, of all doctrines, restorating monarchists, demagogues, socialists, communists, and utopian dreamers of 
every kind. We have harnessed them all to the task: each one of them 
on his own account is boring away at the last remnants of authority, 
is striving to overthrow all established form of order. By these acts all 
States are in torture; they exhort to tranquillity, are ready to sacrifice 
everything for peace: but we will not give them peace until they 
openly acknowledge our international Super-Government, and with 
submissiveness.
The people have raised a howl about the necessity of settling the 
question of Socialism by way of an international agreement. Division 
into fractional parties has given them into our hands, for, in order to 
carry on a contested struggle one must have money, and the money 
is all in our hands.
We might have reason to apprehend a union between the "clearsighted" force of the goy kings on their thrones and the "blind" 
force of the goy mobs, but we have taken all the needful measure 
against any such possibility: between the one and the other force we 
have erected a bulwark in the shape of a mutual terror between 
them. In this way the blind force of the people remains our support 
and we, and we only, shall provide them with a leader and, of course, 
direct them along the road that leads to our goal.
In order that the hand of the blind mob may not free itself from 
our guiding hand, we must every now and then enter into close communion with it, if not actually in person, at any rate through some 
of the most trusty of our brethren. When we are acknowledged as 
the only authority we shall discuss with the people personally on the 
market places, and we shall instruct them on questions of the political 
in such wise as may turn them in the direction that suits us.
Who is going to verify what is taught in the village schools? But 
what an envoy of the government or a king on his throne himself may 
say cannot but become immediately known to the whole State, for it 
will be spread abroad by the voice of the people.
In order not to annihilate the inititutions of the goyim before it
290 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
is time we have touched them with craft and delicacy, and have taken 
hold of the ends of the springs which move their mechanism. These 
springs lay in a strict but just sense of order; we have replaced them 
by the chaotic license of liberalism. We have got our hands into the 
administration of the law, into the conduct of elections, into the press, 
into liberty of the person, but principally into education and training 
as being the corner-stones of a free existence.
We have fooled, bemused and corrupted the youth of the GOYIM
by rearing them in principles and theories which are known to us to 
be false although it is by. us that they have been inculcated.
Above the existing laws without substantially altering them, and 
by merely twisting them into contradictions of interpretations, we have 
erected something grandiose in the way of results. These results found 
expression first in the fact that the interpretations masked the laws: 
afterwards they entirely hid them from the eyes of the governments 
owing to the impossibility of making anything out of the tangled web 
of legislation.
This is the origin of the theory of course of arbitration.
You may say the goyim will rise upon us, arms in hand, if 
they guess what is going on before the time comes; but in the West 
we have against this a manoeuvre of such appalling terror that the 
very stoutest hearts quail—the undergrounds, metropolitains, those 
subterranean corridors which, before the time comes, will be driven 
under all the capitals and from whence those capitals will be blown 
into the air with all their organisations and archives.
PROTOCOL NO. 10
To-day I begin with a repetition of what I said before, and I beg 
you to bear in mind that governments and peoples are content in the 
political with outside appearances. And how, indeed, are the goyim to 
perceive the underlying meaning of things when their representatives give the best of their energies to enjoying themselves? For our 
policy it is of the greatest importance to take cognisance of this detail; 
it will be of assistance to us when we come to consider the division 
of authority, freedom of speech, of the press, of religion (faith), 
of the law of association, of equality before the law, of the inviolability of property, of the dwelling, of taxation (the idea of concealed
C hapter 15 Protocols of the Wise Men of Zion • 291
taxes), of the reflex force of the laws. All these questions are such as 
ought not to be touched upon directly and openly before the people. 
In cases where it is indispensable to touch upon them they must 
not be categorically named, it must merely be declared without detailed 
exposition that the principles of contemporary law are acknowledged 
by us. The reason of keeping silence in this respect is that by not 
naming a principle we leave ourselves freedom of action, to drop this 
or that out of it without attracting notice; if they were all categorically 
named they would all appear to have been already given.
The mob cherishes a special affection and respect for the geniuses 
of political power and accepts all their deeds of violence with the 
admiring response: "rascally, well, yes, it is rascally, but it's clever! 
... a trick, if you like, but how craftily played, how magnificently 
done, what impudent audacity!" . . .
We count upon attracting all nations to the task of erecting the 
new fundamental structure, the project for which has been drawn 
up by us. This is why, before everything, it is indispensable for us 
to arm ourselves and to store up in ourselves that absolutely reckless 
audacity and irresistible might of the spirit which in the person of our 
active workers will break down all hindrances on our way.
When we have accomplished our coup d'etat we shall say then to 
the various peoples: "Everything has gone terribly badly, all have been 
worn out with sufferings. We are destroying the causes of your torment—nationalities, frontiers, differences of coinages. You are at 
liberty, of course, to fronounce sentence upon us, but can it possibly 
be a just one if it is confirmed by you before you make any trial of 
what we are offering you." . . . Then will the mob exalt us and bear 
us up in their hands in a unanimous triumph of hopes and expectations. Voting, which we have made the instrument which will set us 
on the throne of the world by teaching even the very smallest units 
of members of the human race to vote by means of meetings and 
agreements by groups, will then have served its purposes and will play 
its part then for the last time by a unanimity of desire to make close 
acquaintance with us before condemning us.
To secure this we must have everybody vote without distinction of 
classes and qualifications, in order to establish an absolute majority, 
which cannot be got from the educated propertied classes. In this way, 
by inculcating in all a sense of self-importance, we shall destroy among
292 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
the goyim the importance of the family and its educational value and 
remove the possibility of individual minds splitting off, for the mob, 
handled by us, will not let them come to the front nor even give 
them a hearing; it is accustomed to listen to us only who pay it for 
obedience and attention. In this way we shall create a blind, mighty 
force which will never be in a position to move in any direction 
without the guidance of our agents set at its head by us as leaders of 
the mob. The people will submit to this regime because it will know 
that upon these leaders will depend its earnings, gratifications and the 
receipt of all kinds of benefits.
A scheme of government should come ready made from one brain, 
because it will never be clinched firmly if it is allowed to be split 
into fractional parts in the minds of many. It is allowable, therefore, 
for us to have cognisance of the scheme of action but not to discuss it 
lest we disturb its artfulness, the interdependence of its component 
parts, the practical force of the secret meaning of each clause. To 
discuss and make alterations in a labour of this kind by means of 
numerous votings is to impress upon it the stamp of all ratiocinations 
and misunderstandings which have failed to penetrate the depth and 
nexus of its plottings. We want our schemes to be forcible and suitably 
concocted. Therefore WE OUGHT NOT TO FLING THE WORK 
OF GENIUS OF OUR GUIDE to the fangs of the mob or even 
of a select company.
These schemes will not turn existing institutions upside down just 
yet. They will only affect changes in their economy and consequently 
in the whole combined movement of their progress, which will thus 
be directed along the paths laid down in our schemes.
Under various names there exists in all countries approximately one 
and the same thing. Representation, Ministry, Senate, State Council, 
Legislative and Executive Corps. I need not explain to you the 
mechanism of the relation of these institutions to one another, because 
you are aware of all that; only take note of the fact that each of the 
above-named institutions corresponds to some important function of the 
State, and I would beg you to remark that the word "important" I apply 
not to the institution but to the function, consequently it is not the 
institutions which are important but their functions. These institutions 
have divided up among themselves all the functions of government— 
administrative, legislative, executive, wherefore they have come to
Chapter 15 Protocols of the Wise Men of Zion . 293
operate as do the organs in the human body. If we injure one part in 
the machinery of State, the State falls sick, like a human body, and 
will die.
When we introduced into the State organism the poison of Liberalism its whole political complexion underwent a change. -States have 
been seized with a mortal illness—blood-poisoning. All that remains 
is to await the end of their death agony.
Liberalism produced Constitutional States, which took the place of 
what was the only safeguard of the goyim, namely, Despotism; and a 
constitution, as you well know, is nothing else but a school of discords, 
misunderstandings, quarrels, disagreements, fruitless party agitations, 
party whims—in a word, a school of everything that serves to destroy 
the personality of State activity. The tribune of the "talkeries" has, no 
less effectively than the Press, condemned the rulers to inactivity and 
impotence, and thereby rendered them useless and superfluous, for which 
reason indeed they have been in many countries deposed. Then it was 
that the era of republics became possible of realisation; and then it was 
that we replaced the ruler by a caricature of a government—by a 
president, taken from the mob, from the midst of our puppet creatures, 
our slaves. This was the foundation of the mine which we have laid 
under the goy people, I should rather say, under the goy peoples.
In the near future we shall establish the resp6nsibility of presidents.
By that time we shall be in a position to disregard forms in carrying through matters for which our personal puppet will be responsible. 
What do we care if the ranks of those striving for power should be 
thinned, if there should arise a deadlock from the impossibility of 
finding presidents, a deadlock which will finally disorganize the country?
In order that our scheme may produce this result we shall arrange 
elections in favour of such presidents as have in their past some dark, 
undiscovered stain, some "Panama" or other—then they will be trustworthy agents for the accomplishment of our plans out of fear of 
revelations and from the natural desire of everyone who has attained 
power, namely, the retention of privileges, advantages and honour 
connected with the office of president. The chamber of deputies will 
provide cover for, will protect, will elect the president, but we shall take 
from it the right to propose new, or make changes in existing laws, 
for this right will be given by us to the responsible president, a puppet
294 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
in our hands. Naturally, the authority of the president will then 
become a target for every possible form of attack, but we shall provide 
him with a means of self-defence in the right of an appeal to the 
people, for the decision of the people over the heads of their representatives, that is to say, an appeal to that same blind slave of ours— 
the majority of the mob. Independently of this we shall invest the 
president with the right of declaring a state of war. We shall justify 
this last right on the ground that the president as chief of the whole 
army of the country must have it at his disposal, in case of need for the 
defence of the new republican constitution, the right to defend which 
will belong to him as the responsible representative of this constitution.
It is easy to understand that in these conditions the key of the 
shrine will lie in our hands, and no one outside of ourselves will any 
longer direct the force of legislation.
Besides this we shall, with the introduction of the new republican 
constitution, take from the Chamber the right of interpellation on 
government measures, on the pretext of preserving political secrecy, 
and, further, we shall by the new constitution reduce the number of 
representatives to a minimum, thereby proportionately reducing political passions and the passion for politics. If, however, they should, 
which is hardly to be expected, burst into flame, even in this minimum, we shall nullify them by a stirring appeal and a reference to 
the majority of the whole people. . . . Upon the president will 
depend the appointment of presidents and vice-presidents of the Chamber and the Senate. Instead of constant sessions of Parliaments we shall 
reduce their sittings to a few months. Moreover, the president, as 
chief of the executive power, will have the right to summon and 
dissolve Parliament, and, in the latter case, to prolong the time for 
the appointment of a new parliamentary assembly. But in order that 
the consequences of all these acts which in substance are illegal, should 
not, prematurely for our plans, fall upon the responsibility established 
by us of the president, toe shall instigate ministers and other officials 
of the higher administration about the president to evade his dispositions by taking measures of their own, for doing which they will be 
made the scapegoats in his place. . . . This part we especially recommend to be given to be played by the Senate, the Council of State, 
or the Council of Ministers, but not to an individual official.
The president will, at our discretion, interpret the sense of such
Chapter 15 Protocols of the Wise Men of Zion • 295
of the existing laws as admit of various interpretation; he will further 
annul them when we indicate to him the necessity to do so, besides 
this, he will have the right to propose temporary laws, and even new 
departures in the government constitutional working, the pretext both 
for the one and other being the requirements for the supreme welfare 
of the State.
By such measures we shall obtain the power of destroying little by 
little, step by step, all that at the outset when we enter on our rights, 
we are compelled to introduce into the constitutions of States to prepare for the transition to an imperceptible abolition of every kind of 
constitution, and then the time is come to turn every form of government into our despotism.
The recognition of our despot may also come before the destruction 
of the constitution; the moment for this recognition will come when 
the peoples, utterly wearied by the irregularities and incompetence— 
a matter which we shall arrange for—of their rulers, will clamour: 
"Away with them and give us one king over all the earth who will 
unite us and annihilate the causes of discords—frontiers, nationalities, 
religions, State debts—who will give us peace and quiet, which we 
cannot find under our rulers and representatives."
But you yourselves perfectly well know that to produce the possibility of the expression of such wishes by all the nations it is indispensable to trouble in all countries the people's relations with their 
governments so as to utterly exhaust humanity with dissension, hatred, 
struggle, envy and even by the use of torture, by starvation, BY THE 
INOCULATION OF DISEASES, by want, so that the GOYIM see no 
other issue than to take refuge in our complete sovereignty in money 
and in all else.
But if we give the nations of the world a breathing space the 
moment we long for is hardly likely ever to arrive.
PROTOCOL NO. 11
The State Council has been, as it were, the emphatic expression of 
the authority of the ruler: it will be, as the "show" part of the 
Legislative Corps, what may be called the editorial committee of the 
laws and decrees of the ruler.
This, then, is the programme of the new constitution. We shall
296 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
make Law, Right and Justice (1) in the guise of proposals to the 
Legislative Corps, (2) by decrees of the president under the guise of 
general regulations, of orders of the Senate and of resolutions of the 
State Council in the guise of ministerial orders, (3) and in case a 
suitable occasion should arise—in the form of a revolution in the 
State.
Having established approximately the modus agendi we will occupy 
ourselves with details of those combinations by which we have still 
to complete the revolution in the course of the machinery of State in 
the direction already indicated. By these combinations I mean the 
freedom of the Press, the right of association, freedom of conscience, 
the voting principle, and many another that must disappear for ever 
from the memory of man, or undergo a radical alteration the day 
after the promulgation of the new constitution. It is only at that 
moment that we shall be able at once to announce all our orders, for, 
afterwards, every noticeable alteration will be dangerous, for the following reasons: if this alteration be brought in with harsh severity 
and in a sense of severity and limitations, it may lead to a feeling of 
despair caused by fear of new alterations in the same direction; if, 
on the other hand, it be brought in in a sense of further indulgences 
it will be said that we have recognised our own wrongdoing and this 
will destroy the prestige of the infallibility of our authority, or else 
it will be said that we have become alarmed and are compelled to show 
a yielding disposition, for which we shall get no thanks because it will 
be supposed to be compulsory. . . . Both the one and the other are 
injurious to the prestige of the new constitution. What we want is 
that from the first moment of its promulgation, while the peoples of 
the world are still stunned by the accomplished fact of the revolution, 
still in a condition of terror and uncertainty, they should recognise 
once for all that we are so strong, so inexpugnable, so superabundantly 
filled with power, that in no case shall we take any account of them, 
and so far from paying any attention to their opinions or wishes, we 
are ready and able to crush with irresistible power all expression or 
manifestation thereof at every moment and in every place, that we 
have seized at once everything we wanted and shall in no case divide 
our power with them. . . . Then in fear and trembling they will close 
their eyes to everything, and be content to await what will be the 
end of it all.
Chapter l5 Protocols of the Wise Men of Zion • 297
The goyim are a flock of sheep, and we are their wolves. And you 
know what happens when the wolves get hold of the flock? . . .
There is another reason also why they will close their eyes: for we 
shall keep promising them to give back all the liberties we have taken 
away as soon as we have quelled the enemies of peace and tamed all 
parties. . . .
It is not worth while to say anything about how long a time they 
will be kept waiting for this return of their liberties. . . .
For what purpose then have we invented this whole policy and 
insinuated it into the minds of the goys without giving them any 
chance to examine its underlying meaning? For what, indeed, if not 
in order to obtain in a roundabout way what is for our scattered tribe 
unattainable by the direct road? It is this which has served as the basis 
for our organisation of SECRET MASONRY WHICH IS NOT 
KNOWN TO, AND AIMS WHICH ARE NOT EVEN SO MUCH 
AS SUSPECTED BY, THESE GOY CATTLE, ATTRACTED BY 
US INTO THE "SHOW ARMY OF MASONIC LODGES IN 
ORDER TO THROW DUST IN THE EYES OF THEIR FELLOWS.
God has granted to us, His Chosen People, the gift of the dispersion, and in this which appears in all eyes to be our weakness, has 
come forth all our strength, which has now brought us to the threshold 
of sovereignty over all the world.
There now remains not much more for us to build up upon the 
foundation we have laid.
PROTOCOL NO. 12
The word "freedom," which can be interpreted in various ways, is 
defined by us as follows:—
Freedom is the right to do that which the law allows. This interpretation of the word will at the proper time be of service to us, because 
all freedom will thus be in our hands, since the laws will abolish or 
create only that which is desirable for us according to the aforesaid 
programme.
We shall deal with the press in the following way: What is the 
part played by the press to-day? It serves to excite and inflame those 
passions which are needed for our purpose or else it serves selfish ends 
of parties. It is often vapid, unjust, mendacious, and the majority of
298 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
the public have not the slightest idea what ends the press really serves. 
We shall saddle and bridle it with a tight curb: we shall do the same 
also with all productions of the printing press, for where would be 
the sense of getting rid of the attacks of the press if we remain 
targets for pamphlets and boob? The produce of publicity, which 
nowadays is a source of heavy expense owing to the necessity of censoring it, will be turned by us into a very lucrative source of income to 
our State: we shall lay on it a special stamp tax and require deposits 
of caution-money before permitting the establishment of any organ of 
the press or of printing offices; these will then have to guarantee our 
government against any kind of attack on the pan of the press. For 
any attempt to attack us, if such still be possible, we shall inflict fines 
without mercy. Such measures as stamp tax, deposit of caution-money 
and fines secured by these deposits, will bring in a huge income to the 
government. It is true that party organs might not spare money for the 
sake of publicity, but these we shall shut up at the second attack upon 
us. No one shall with impunity lay a finger on the aureole of our 
government infallibility. The pretext for stopping any publication will 
be the alleged plea that it is agitating the public mind without occasion 
or justification. I beg you to note that among those making attacks upon 
us will also be organs established by us, but they will attack exclusively 
points that we have pre-determined to alter.
Not a single announcement will reach the public without our control. Even now this is already being attained by us inasmuch as all 
news items are received by a few agencies, in whose offices they are 
focused from all parts of the world. These agencies will then be 
already entirely ours and will give publicity only to what we dictate 
to them.
If already now we have contrived to possess ourselves of the minds 
of the goy communities to such an extent that they all come near 
looking upon the events of the world through the coloured glasses of 
those spectacles we are setting astride their noses: if already now there 
is not a single State where there exist for us any barriers to admittance 
into what goy stupidity calls State secrets: what will our position be 
then, when we shall be acknowledged supreme lords of the world in 
the person of our king of all the world....
Let us turn again to the future of the printing press. Every one 
desirous of being a publisher, librarian, or printer, will be obliged to 
provide himself with the diploma instituted therefor, which, in case
Chapter 15 Protocols of the Wise Men of Zion • 299
of any fault, will be immediately impounded. With such measures the 
instrument of thought will become an educative means in the hands of 
our government, which will no longer allow the mass of the nation to 
be led astray in by-ways and fantasies about the blessings of progress. Is 
there any one of us who does not know that these phantom blessings are 
the direct roads to foolish imaginings which give birth to anarchical 
relations of men among themselves and towards authority, because 
progress, or rather the idea of progress, has introduced the conception 
of every kind of emancipation, but has failed to establish its limits. . . . 
All the so-called liberals are anarchists, if not in fact, at any rate in 
thought. Every one of them is hunting after phantoms of freedom, 
and falling exclusively into license, that is, into the anarchy of protest for the sake of protest. . . .
We turn to the periodical press. We shall impose on it, as on all 
printed matter, stamp taxes per sheet and deposits of caution-money, 
and books of less than 30 sheets will pay double. We shall reckon them 
as pamphlets in order, on the one hand, to reduce the number of magazines, which are the worst form of printed poison, and, on the other, 
in order that this measure may force writers into such lengthy productions that they will be little read, especially as they will be costly. At the 
same time what we shall publish ourselves to influence mental development in the direction laid down for our profit will be cheap and will be 
read voraciously. The tax will bring vapid literary ambitions within bounds 
and the liability to penalties will make literary men dependent upon 
us. And if there should be any found who are desirous of writing 
against us, they will not find any person eager to print their productions. Before accepting any production for publication in print the 
publisher or printer will have to apply to the authorities for permission 
to do so. Thus we shall know beforehand of all tricks preparing against 
us and shall nullify them by getting ahead with explanations on the 
subject treated of.
Literature and journalism are two of the most important educative 
forces, and therefore our government will become proprietor of the 
majority of the journals. This will neutralise the injurious influence 
of the privately owned press and will put us in possession of a tremendous influence upon the public mind. ... If we give permits for 
ten journals, we shall ourselves found thirty, and so on in the same 
proportion. This, however, must in nowise be suspected by the public.
300 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
For which reason all journals published by us will be of the most 
opposite, in appearance, tendencies and opinions, thereby creating confidence in us and bringing over to us our quite unsuspicious opponents, 
who will thus fall into our trap and be rendered harmless.
In the front rank will stand organs of an official character. They 
will always stand guard over our interests, and therefore their influence 
will be comparatively insignificant.
In the second rank will be the semi-official organs, whose part it 
will be to attract the tepid and indifferent.
In the third rank we shall set up our own, to all appearance, opposition, which, in at least one of its organs, will present what looks like 
the very antipodes to us. Our real opponents at heart will accept this 
simulated opposition as their own and will show us their cards.
All our newspapers will be of all possible complexions—aristocratic, republican, revolutionary, even anarchical—for so long, of 
course, as the constitution exists. . . . Like the Indian idol Vishnu 
they will have a hundred hands, and every one of them will have a 
finger on any one of the public opinions as required. When a pulse 
quickens these hands will lead opinion in the direction of our aims, 
for an excited patient loses all power of judgment and easily yields 
to suggestion. Those fools who will think they are repeating the 
opinion of a newspaper of their own camp will be repeating our 
opinion or any opinion that seems desirable for us. In the vain belief 
that they are following the organ of their party they will in fact 
follow the flag which we hang out for them.
In order to direct our newspaper militia in this sense we must take 
especial and minute care in organising this matter. Under the title of 
central department of the press we shall institute literary gatherings 
at which our agents will without attracting attention issue the orders 
and watchwords of the day. By discussing and controverting, but always 
superficially, without touching the essence of the matter, our organs 
will carry on a sham fight fusillade with the official newspapers solely 
for the purpose of giving occasion for us to express ourselves more 
fully than could well be done from the outset in official announcements, whenever, of course, that is to our advantage.
These attacks upon us will also serve another purpose, namely, that 
our subjects will be convinced of the existence of full freedom of 
speech and so give our agents an occasion to affirm that all organs
Chapter 15 Protocols of the Wise Men of Zion . 301
which oppose us are empty babblers, since they are incapable of finding 
any substantial objections to our orders.
Methods of organisation like these, imperceptible to the public eye 
but absolutely sure, are the best calculated to succeed in bringing the 
attention and the confidence of the public to the side of our government. Thanks to such methods we shall be in a position as from 
time to time may be required, to excite or to tranquillise the public 
mind on political questions, to persuade or to confuse, printing now 
truth, now lies, facts or their contradictions, according as they may 
be well or ill received, always very cautiously feeling our ground 
before stepping upon it. . . . We shall have a sure triumph over our 
opponents since they will not have at their disposition organs of the 
press in which they can give full and final expression to their views 
owing to the aforesaid methods of dealing with the press. We shall 
not even need to refute them except very superficially.
Trial shots like these, fired by us in the third rank of our press, 
in case of need, will be energetically refuted by us in our semiofficial organs.
Even nowadays, already, to take only the French press, there are 
forms which reveal masonic solidarity in acting on the watchword: 
all organs of the press are bound together by professional secrecy; 
like the augurs of old, not one of their numbers will give away the 
secret of his sources of information unless it be resolved to make 
announcement to them. Not one journalist will venture to betray 
this secret, for not one of them is ever admitted to practise literature 
unless his whole past has some disgraceful sore or other. . . . These 
sores would be immediately revealed. So long as they remain the 
secret of a few the prestige of the journalist attracts the majority of 
the country—the mob follows after him with enthusiasm.
Our calculations are especially extended to the provinces. It is indispensable for us to inflame there those hopes and impulses with 
which we could at any moment fall upon the capital, and we shall 
represent to the capitals that these expressions are the independent 
hopes and impulses of the provinces. Naturally, the source of them 
will be always one and the same—ours. What we need is that, until 
such time as we are in the plenitude of fower, the capitals should 
find themselves stifled by the provincial opinion of the nation, i.e., of 
a majority arranged by our agentur. What we need is that at the psycho-
302 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
logical moment the capitals should not be in a position to discuss an 
accomplished fact for the simple reason, if for no other, that it has 
been accepted by the public opinion of a majority in the provinces.
When we are in the period of the new regime transitional to that 
of our assumption of full sovereignty we must not admit any revelations by the press of any form of public dishonesty; it is necessary 
that the new regime should be thought to have so perfectly contented 
everybody that even criminality has disappeared. , . . Cases of the 
manifestation of criminality should remain known only to their victims and to chance witnesses—no more.
PROTOCOL NO. 13
The need for daily bread forces the goyim to keep silence and be 
our humble servants. Agents taken on to our press from among the 
goyim will at our order discuss anything which it is inconvenient for 
us to issue directly in official documents, and we meanwhile, quietly 
amid the din of the discussion so raised, shall simply take and carry 
through such measures as we wish and then offer them to the public 
as an accomplished fact. No one will dare to demand the abrogation of 
a matter once settled, all the more so as it will be represented as an 
improvement. . . . And immediately the press will distract the current 
of thought towards new questions (have we not trained people always 
to be seeking something new?). Into the discussions of these new 
questions will throw themselves those of the brainless dispensers of 
fortunes who are not able even now to understand that they have 
not the remotest conception about the matters which they undertake 
to discuss. Questions of the political are unattainable for any save 
those who have guided it already for many ages, the creators.
From all this you will see that in securing the opinion of the 
mob we are only facilitating the working of our machinery, and 
you may remark that it is not for actions but for words issued by us 
on this or that question that we seem to seek approval. We are constantly making public declaration that we are guided in all our undertakings by the hope, joined to the conviction, that we are serving the 
commonweal.
In order to distract people who may be too troublesome from 
discussions of questions of the political we are now putting forward
Chapter l5 Protocols of the Wise Men of Zion • 303
what we allege to be new questions of the political, namely, questions 
of industry. In this sphere let them discuss themselves silly! The 
masses are agreed to remain inactive, to take a rest from what they 
suppose to be political activity (which we trained them to in order 
to use them as a means of combating the goy governments) only on 
condition of being found new employments, in which we are prescribing them something that looks like the same political object. In 
order that the masses themselves may not guess what they are about 
we further distract them with amusements, games, pastimes, passions, 
people's palaces. . . . Soon we shall begin through the press to propose 
competitions in art, in sport of all kinds: these interests will finally 
distract their minds from questions in which we should find ourselves 
compelled to oppose them. Growing more and more disaccustomed to 
reflect and form any opinions of their own, people will begin to 
talk in the same tone as we, because we alone shall be offering them 
new directions for thought ... of course through such persons as 
will not be suspected of solidarity with us.
The part played by the liberals, utopian dreamers, will be finally 
played out when our government is acknowledged. Till such time 
they will continue to do us good service. Therefore we shall continue 
to direct their minds to all sorts of vain conceptions of fantastic 
theories, new and apparently progressive: for have we not with complete success turned the brainless heads of the goyim with progress, 
till there is not among the goyim one mind able to perceive that 
under this word lies a departure from truth in all cases where it is 
not a question of material inventions, for truth is one, and in it there 
is no place for progress. Progress, like a fallacious idea, serves to 
obscure truth so that none may know it except us, the Chosen of 
God, its guardians.
When we come into our kingdom our orators will expound great 
problems which have turned humanity upside down in order to bring 
it at the end under our beneficent rule.
Who will ever suspect then that ALL THESE PEOPLES WERE 
STAGE-MANAGED BY US ACCORDING TO A POLITICAL 
PLAN WHICH NO ONE HAS SO MUCH AS GUESSED AT 
IN THE COURSE OF MANY CENTURIES? . . .
304 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
PROTOCOL NO. 14
When we come into our kingdom it will be undesirable for us that 
there should exist any other religion than ours of the One God with 
whom our destiny is bound up by our position as the Chosen People 
and through whom our same destiny is united with the destinies of 
the world. We must therefore sweep away all other forms of belief. 
If this gives birth to the atheists whom we see to-day, it will not, 
being only a transitional stage, interfere with our views, but will serve 
as a warning for those generations which will hearken to our preaching 
of the religion of Moses, that, by its stable and thoroughly elaborated 
system, has brought all the peoples of the world into subjection to us. 
Therein we shall emphasise its mystical right, on which, as we shall 
say, all its educative power is based. . . . Then at every possible 
opportunity we shall publish articles in which we shall make comparisons between our beneficent rule and those of past ages. The blessings of tranquillity, though it be a tranquillity forcibly brought about 
by centuries of agitation, will throw into higher relief the benefits 
to which we shall point. The errors of the goyim governments will be 
depicted by us in the most vivid hues. We shall implant such an 
abhorrence of them that the peoples will prefer tranquillity in a state 
of serfdom to those rights of vaunted freedom which have tortured 
humanity and exhausted the very sources of human existence, sources 
which have been exploited by a mob of rascally adventurers who 
know not what they do. . . . Useless changes of forms of government 
to which toe instigated the GOYIM token toe were undermining their 
state structures, will have so wearied the peoples by that time that 
they will prefer to suffer anything under us rather than run the 
risk of enduring again all the agitations and miseries they have gone 
through.
At the same time we shall not omit to emphasise the historical 
mistakes of the goy governments which have tormented humanity for 
so many centuries by their lack of understanding of everything that 
constitutes the true good of humanity in their chase after fantastic 
schemes of social blessings, and have never noticed that these schemes 
kept on producing a worse and never a better state of the universal 
relations which are the basis of human life. ...
Chapter 15 Protocols of the Wise Men of Zion • 305
The whole force of our principles and methods will lie in the 
fact that we shall present them and expound them as a splendid 
contrast to the dead and decomposed old order of things in social life.
Our philosophers will discuss all the shortcomings of the various 
beliefs of the goyim, BUT NO ONE WILL EVER BRING UNDER 
DISCUSSION OUR FAITH FROM ITS TRUE POINT OF 
VIEW SINCE THIS WILL BE FULLY LEARNED BY NONE 
SAVE OURS, WHO WILL NEVER DARE TO BETRAY ITS 
SECRETS.
In countries known as progressive and enlightened we have created 
a senseless, filthy, abominable literature. For some time after our 
entrance to power we shall continue to encourage its existence in order 
to provide a telling relief by contrast to the speeches, party programme, which will be distributed from exalted quarters of ours. . . . 
Our wise men, trained to become leaders of the goyim, will compose 
speeches, projects, memoirs, articles, which will be used by us to 
influence the minds of the goyim, directing them towards such understanding and forms of knowledge as have been determined by us.
PROTOCOL NO. 15
When we at last definitely come into our kingdom by the aid of 
coup d'etat prepared everywhere for one and the same day, after 
the worthlessness of all existing forms of government has been definitely acknowledged (and not a little time will pass before that comes 
about, perhaps even a whole century) we shall make it our task to 
see that against us such things as plots shall no longer exist. With this 
purpose we shall slay without mercy all who take arms (in hand) to 
oppose our coming into our kingdom. Every kind of new institution 
of anything like a secret society will also be punished with death; 
those of them which are now in existence, are known to us, serve us 
and have served us, we shall disband and send into exile to continents 
far removed from Europe. In this toay toe shall proceed with those 
goy masons who know too much; such of these as we may for some 
reason spare will be kept in constant fear of exile. We shall promulgate a law making all former members of secret societies liable to exile 
from Europe as the centre of our rule.
Resolutions of our government will be final, without appeal.
306 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
In the goy societies, in which we have planted and deeply rooted 
discord and protestantism, the only possible way of restoring order is 
to employ merciless measures that prove the direct force of authority: 
no regard must be paid to the victims who fall, they suffer for the 
well-being of the future. The attainment of that well-being, even at 
the expense of sacrifices, is the duty of any kind of government that 
acknowledges as justification for its existence not only its privileges 
but its obligations. The principal guarantee of stability of rule is to 
confirm the aureole of power, and this aureole is attained only by 
such a majestic inflexibility of might as shall carry on its face the 
emblems of inviolability from mystical causes—from the choice of 
God. Such was, until recent times, the Russian autocracy, the one and 
only serious foe we had, in the world, without counting the Papacy. 
Bear in mind the example when Italy, drenched with blood, never 
touched a hair of the head of Sulla* who had poured forth that blood: 
Sulla enjoyed an apotheosis for his might in the eyes of the people, 
though they had been torn in pieces by him, but his intrepid return 
to Italy ringed him round with inviolability. The people do not lay 
a finger on him who hypnotises them by his daring and strength of 
mind.
Meantime, however, until we come into our kingdom, we shall act 
in the contrary way: we shall create and multiply free masonic lodges 
in all the countries of the world, absorb into them all who may become or who are prominent in public activity, for in these lodges 
we shall find our principal intelligence office and means of influence. 
All these lodges we shall bring under one central administration, 
known to us alone and to all others absolutely unknown, which will 
be composed of our learned elders. The lodges will have their representatives who will serve to screen the above-mentioned administration 
of masonry and from whom will issue the watchword and programme. 
In these lodges we shall tie together the knot which binds together 
all revolutionary and liberal elements. Their composition will be 
made up of all strata of society. The most secret political plots will 
be known to us and will fall under our guiding hands on the very day 
of their conception. Among the members of these lodges will be al-
*Some versions of the "Protocols" followed Joly's "Dialogues" so 
closely that Joly's mistaken spelling of Sulla's name as "Sylla" was also 
copied. In the translation of the "Protocols" here used, however, the mistake was rectified.—H. B.
Chapter l5 Protocols of the Wise Men of Zion • 307
most all the agents of international and national police since their 
service is for us irreplaceable in the respect that the police is in a 
position not only to use its own particular measures with the insubordinate, but also to screen our activities and provide pretexts for 
discontents, et cetera.
The class of people who most willingly enter into secret societies 
are those who live by their wits, careerists, and in general people, 
mostly light-minded, with whom we shall have no difficulty in dealing 
and in using to wind up the mechanism of the machine devised by 
us. If this world grows agitated the meaning of that will be that we 
have had to stir it up in order to break up its too great solidarity. 
But if there should, arise in its midst a plot, then at the head of that 
plot will be no other than one of our most trusted servants. It is 
natural that we and no other should lead masonic activities, for we 
know whither we are leading, we know the final goal of every form 
of activity whereas the goyim have knowledge of nothing, not even 
of the immediate effect of action; they put before themselves, usually, the momentary reckoning of the satisfaction of their self-opinion 
in the accomplishment of their thought without even remarking that 
the very conception never belonged to their initiative but to our instigation of their thought....
The goyim enter the lodges out of curiosity or in the hope by 
their means to get a nibble at the public pie, and some of them in 
order to obtain a hearing before the public for their impracticable 
and groundless fantasies: they thirst for the emotion of success and 
applause, of which we are remarkably generous. And the reason why 
we give them this success is to make use of the high conceit of themselves to which it gives birth, for that insensibly disposes them to 
assimilate our suggestions without being on their guard against them 
in the fullness of their confidence that it is their own infallibility 
which is giving utterance to their own thoughts and that it is impossible for them to borrow those of others. . . . You cannot imagine 
to what extent the wisest of the goyim can be brought to a state of 
unconscious naivete in the presence of this condition of high conceit 
of themselves, and at the same time how easy it is to take the heart 
out of them by the slightest ill-success, though it be nothing more 
than the stoppage of the applause they had, and to reduce them to a 
slavish submission for the sake of winning a renewal of success. . . .
308 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
By so much as ours disregard success if only they can carry through 
their plans, by so much the goyim are willing to sacrifice any plans 
only to have success. This psychology of theirs materially facilitates 
for us the task of setting them in the required direction. These tigers 
in appearance have the souls of sheep and the wind blows freely 
through their heads. We have set them on the hobby-horse of an 
idea about the absorption of individuality by the symbolic unit of 
collectivism. . . . They have never yet and they never will have the 
sense to reflect that this hobby-horse is a manifest violation of the 
most important law of nature, which has established from the very 
creation of the world one unit unlike another and precisely for the 
purpose of instituting individuality. . . .
If we have been able to bring them to such a pitch of stupid 
blindness is it not a proof, and an amazingly clear proof, of the 
degree to which the mind of the goyim is undeveloped in comparison 
with our mind? This it is, mainly, which guarantees our success.
And how far-seeing were our learned elders in ancient times when 
they said that to attain a serious end it behoves not to stop at any 
means or to count the victims sacrificed for the sake of that end. . . . 
We have not counted the victims of the seed of the goy cattle, though 
we have sacrificed many of our own, but for that we have now already 
given them such a position on the earth as they could not even have 
dreamed of. The comparatively small numbers of the victims from the 
number of ours have preserved our nationality from destruction.
Death is the inevitable end for all. It is better to bring that end 
nearer to those who hinder our affairs than to ourselves, to the 
founders of this affair. We execute masons in such wise that none save 
the brotherhood can ever have a susficion of it, not even the victims 
themselves of our death sentence, they all die when required as if 
from a normal kind of illness. . . . Knowing this, even the brotherhood 
in its turn dare not protest. By such methods we have plucked out 
of the midst of masonry the very root of protest against our disposition. While preaching liberalism to the goyim we at the same time 
keep our own people and our agents in a state of unquestioning 
submission.
Under our influence the execution of the laws of the goyim has 
been reduced to a minimum. The prestige of the law has been exploded by the liberal interpretations introduced into this sphere. In
Chapter l5 Protocols of the Wise Men of Zion • 309
the most important and fundamental affairs and questions judges 
decide as we dictate to them, see matters in the light wherewith we 
enfold them for the administration of the goyim, of course, through 
persons who are our tools though we do not appear to have anything 
in common with them—by newspaper opinion or by other means. . . . 
Even senators and the higher administration accept our counsels. The 
purely brute mind of the goyim is incapable of use for analysis and 
observation, and still more for the foreseeing whither a certain manner 
of setting a question may tend.
In this difference in capacity for thought between the goyim and 
ourselves may be clearly discerned the seal of our position on the 
Chosen People and of our higher quality of humanness, in contradistinction to the brute mind of the goyim. Their eyes are open, but 
see nothing before them and do not invent (unless, perhaps, material 
things). From this it is plain that nature herself has destined us to 
guide and rule the world.
When comes the time of our overt rule, the time to manifest its 
blessings, we shall remake all legislatures, all our laws will be brief, 
plain, stable, without any kind of interpretations, so that anyone will 
be in a position to know them perfectly. The main feature which 
will run right through them is submission to orders, and this principle 
will be carried to a grandiose height. Every abuse will then disappear 
in consequence of the responsibility of all down to the lowest unit 
before the higher authority of the representative of power. Abuses of 
power subordinate to this last instance will be so mercilessly punished 
that none will be found anxious to try experiments with their own 
powers. We shall follow up jealously every action of the administration on which depends the smooth running of the machinery of 
the State, for slackness in this produces slackness everywhere; not a 
single case of illegality or abuse of power will be left without exemplary punishment.
Concealment of guilt, connivance between those in the service of 
the administration—all this kind of evil will disappear after the very 
first examples of severe punishment. The aureole of our power demands suitable, that is, cruel, punishments for the slightest infringement, for the sake of gain, of its supreme prestige. The sufferer, 
though his punishment may exceed his fault, will count as a soldier 
falling on the administrative field of battle in the interest of au-
310 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
thority, principle and law, which do not permit that any of those 
who hold the reins of the public coach should turn aside from the 
public highway to their own private paths. For example: our judges 
will know that whenever they feel disposed to fpume themselves on 
foolish clemency they are violating the law of justice which is instituted for the exemplary edification of men by penalties for lapses and 
not for display of the spiritual qualities of the judge. . . . Such qualities it is proper to show in private life, but not in a public square 
which is the educationary basis of human life.
Our legal staff will serve not beyond the age of 55, firstly because 
old men more obstinately hold to prejudiced opinions, and are less 
capable of submitting to new directions, and second because this will 
give us the possibility by this measure of securing elasticity in the 
changing of staff, which will thus the more easily bend under our 
pressure: he who wishes to keep his place will have to give blind 
obedience to deserve it. In general, our judges will be elected by us 
only from among those who thoroughly understand that the part they 
have to play is to punish and apply laws and not to dream about the 
manifestations of liberalism at the expense of the educationary scheme 
of the State, as the goyim in these days imagine it to be. . . . This 
method of shuffling the staff will serve also to explode any collective 
solidarity of those in the same service and will bind all to the interests of the government upon which their fate will depend. The young 
generation of judges will be trained in certain views regarding the 
inadmissibility of any abuses that might disturb the established order 
of our subjects among themselves.
In these days the judges of the goyim create indulgences to every 
kind of crime, not having a just understanding of their office, because 
the rulers of the present age in appointing judges to office take no 
care to inculcate in them a sense of duty and consciousness of the 
matter which is demanded of them. As a brute beast lets out its young 
in search of prey, so do the goyim give their subjects places of profit 
without thinking to make clear to them for what purpose such place 
was created. This is the reason why their governments are being ruined 
by their own forces through the acts of their own administration.
Let us borrow from the example of the results of these actions yet 
another lesson for our government.
We shall root out liberalism from all the important strategic posts
Chapter 15 Protocols of the Wise Men of Zion • 311
of our government on which depends the training of subordinates 
for onr State structure. Such posts will fall exclusively to those who 
have been trained by us for administrative rule. To the possible 
objection that the retirement of old servants will cost the Treasury 
heavily, I reply, firstly, they will be provided with some private 
service in place of what they lose, and, secondly, I have to remark 
that all the money in the world will be concentrated in our hands, 
consequently it is not our government that has to fear expense.
Our absolutism will in all things be logically consecutive and 
therefore in each one of its decrees our supreme will will be respected 
and unquestionably fulfilled: it will ignore all murmurs, all discontents of every kind and will destroy to the root every kind of manifestation of them in act by punishment of an exemplary character.
We shall abolish the right of cassation, which will be transferred 
exclusively to our disposal—to the cognisance of him who rules, for 
we must not allow the conception among the people of a thought 
that there could be such a thing as a decision that is not right of judges 
set up by us. If, however, anything like this should occur, we shall 
ourselves cassate the decision, but inflict therewith such exemplary 
punishment on the judge for lack of understanding of his duty and 
the purpose of his appointment as will prevent a repetition of such 
cases. ... I repeat that it must be borne in mind that we shall know 
every step of our administration which only needs to be closely watched 
for the people to be content with us, for it has the right to demand 
from a good government a good official.
Our government will have the appearance of a patriarchal paternal 
guardianship on the part of our ruler. Our own nation and our subjects will discern in his person a father caring for their every need, 
their every act, their every inter-relation as subjects one with another, 
as well as their relations to the ruler. They will then be so thoroughly 
imbued with the thought that it is impossible for them to dispense 
with this wardship and guidance, if they wish to live in peace and 
quiet, that they will acknowledge the autocracy of our ruler with a 
devotion bordering on APOTHEOSIS, especially when they are convinced that those whom we set up do not put their own in place of 
his authority, but only blindly execute his dictates. They will be 
rejoiced that we have regulated everything in their lives as is done 
by wise parents who desire to train their children in the cause of
312 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
duty and submission. For the peoples of the world in regard to the 
secrets of our polity are ever through the ages only children under 
age, precisely as are also their governments.
As you see, I found our despotism on right and duty: the right to 
compel the execution of duty is the direct obligation of a government 
which is a father for its subjects. It has the right of the strong that 
it may use it for the benefit of directing humanity towards that order 
which is defined by nature, namely, submission. Everything in the 
world is in a state of submission, if not to man, then to circumstances 
or its own inner character, in all cases, to what is stronger. And so 
shall we be this something stronger for the sake of good.
We are obliged without hesitation to sacrifice individuals, who 
commit a breach of established order, for in the exemplary punishment of evil lies a great educational problem.
When the King of Israel sets upon his sacred head the crown 
offered him by Europe he will become patriarch of the world. The 
indispensable victims offered by him in consequence of their suitability will never reach the number of victims offered in the course 
of centuries by the mania of magnificence, the emulation between the 
goy governments.
Our King will be in constant communion with the peoples, making 
to them from the tribune speeches which fame will in that same hour 
distribute over all the world.
PROTOCOL NO. 16
In order to effect the destruction of all collective forces except 
ours we shall emasculate the first stage of collectivism—the universities, 
by re-educating them in a new direction. Their officials and professors 
will be prepared for their business by detailed secret programmes of 
action from which they will not with immunity diverge, not by one 
iota. They will be appointed with esfecial precaution, and will be so 
placed as to be wholly dependent upon the Government.
We shall exclude from the course of instruction State Law as also 
all that concerns the political question. These subjects will be taught 
to a few dozens of persons chosen for their pre-eminent capacities 
from among the number of the initiated. The universities must no 
longer send out from their halls milksops concocting plans for a con-
Chapter 15 Protocols of the Wise Men of Zion • 313
stitution, like a comedy or a tragedy, busying themselves with questions of policy in which even their own fathers never had any power 
of thought.
The ill-guided acquaintance of a large number of persons with 
questions of polity creates Utopian dreamers and bad subjects, as you 
can see for yourselves from the example of the universal education in 
this direction of the goyim. We must introduce into their education 
all those principles which have so brilliantly broken up their order. 
But when we are in power we shall remove every kind of disturbing 
subject from the course of education and shall make out of the youth 
obedient children of authority, loving him who rules as the support 
and hope of peace and quiet.
Classicism, as also any form of study of ancient history, in which 
there are more bad than good examples, we shall replace with the 
study of the programme of the future. We shall erase from the 
memory of men all facts of previous centuries which are undesirable 
to us, and leave only those which depict all the errors of the government of the goyim. The study of practical life, of the obligations of 
order, of the relations of people one to another, of avoiding bad and 
selfish examples, which spread the infection of evil, and similar questions of an educative nature, will stand in the forefront of the teaching 
programme, which will be drawn up on a separate plan for each calling or state of life, in no wise generalising the teaching. This treatment of the question has special importance.
Each state of life must be trained within strict limits corresponding 
to its destination and work in life. The occasional genius has always 
managed and always will manage to slip through into other states of 
life, but it is the most perfect folly for the sake of this rare occasional genius to let through into ranks foreign to them the untalented 
who thus rob of their places those who belong to those ranks by birth 
or employment. You know yourselves in what all this has ended for 
the GOYIM who allowed this crying absurdity.
In order that he who rules may be seated firmly in the hearts 
and minds of his subjects it is necessary for the time of his activity 
to instruct the whole nation in the schools and on the market places 
about his meaning and his acts and all his beneficent initiatives.
We shall abolish every kind of freedom of instruction. Learners 
of all ages will have the right to assemble together with their parents
314 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
in the educational establishments as it were in a club: daring these 
assemblies, on holidays, teachers will read what will pass as free 
lectures on questions of human relations, of the laws of examples, of 
the limitations which are born of unconscious relations, and, finally, 
of the philosophy of new theories not yet declared to the world. 
These theories will be raised by us to the stage of a dogma of faith 
as a transitional stage towards our faith. On the completion of this 
exposition of our programme of action in the present and the future 
I will read you the principles of these theories.
In a word, knowing by the experience of many centuries that people 
live and are guided by ideas, that these ideas are imbibed by people 
only by the aid of education provided with equal success for all ages 
of growth, but of course by varying methods, we shall swallow up 
and confiscate to our own use the last scintilla of independence of 
thought, which we have for long past been directing towards subjects 
and ideas useful for us. The system of bridling thought is already 
at work in the so-called system of teaching by object lessons, the purpose of which is to turn the goyim into unthinking submissive brutes 
waiting for things to be presented before their eyes in order to form 
an idea of them. ... In France, one of our best agents, Bourgeois, 
has already made public a new programme of teaching by object 
lessons.
PROTOCOL NO. 17
The practice of advocacy produces men cold, cruel, persistent, unprincipled, who in all cases take up an impersonal, purely legal standpoint. They have the inveterate habit to refer everything to its value 
for the defence and not to the public welfare of its results. They 
do not usually decline to undertake any defence whatever, they strive 
for an acquittal at all costs, cavilling over every petty crux of jurisprudence and thereby they demoralise justice. For this reason we 
shall set this profession into narrow frames which will keep it inside 
this sphere of executive public service. Advocates, equally with judges, 
will be deprived of the right of communication with litigants; they 
will receive business only from the court and will study it by notes 
of report and documents, defending their clients after they have 
been interrogated in court on facts that have appeared. They will 
receive an honorarium without regard to the quality of the defence.
Chapter 15 Protocols of the Wise Men of Zion • 315
This will render them mere reporters on law-business in the interests 
of justice and as counterpoise to the proctor who will be the reporter in 
the interests of prosecution; this will shorten business before the 
courts. In this way will be established a practice of honest unprejudiced 
defence conducted not from personal interest but by conviction. This 
will also, by the way, remove the present practice of corrupt bargain 
between advocates to agree only to let that side win which pays 
most. . . .
We have long past taken care to discredit the priesthood of the 
goyim, and thereby to ruin their mission on earth which in these days 
might still be a great hindrance to us. Day by day its influence on the 
peoples of the world is falling lower. Freedom of conscience has been 
declared everywhere, so that now only years divide us from the moment of the complete wrecking of that Christian religion: as to 
other religions we shall have still less difficulty in dealing with them, 
but it would be premature to speak of this now. We shall set clericalism and clericals into such narrow frames as to make their influence 
move in retrogressive proportion to its former progress.
When the time comes finally to destroy the papal court the finger 
of an invisible hand will point the nations towards this court. When, 
however, the nations fling themselves upon it, we shall come forward 
in the guise of its defenders as if to save excessive bloodshed. By 
this diversion we shall penetrate to its very bowels and be sure we 
shall never come out again until we have gnawed through the entire 
strength of this place.
The King of the Jews will be the real Pope of the Universe, the 
patriarch of an international Church.
But, in the meantime, while we are re-educating youth in new 
traditional religions and afterwards in ours, we shall not overtly lay 
a finger on existing churches, but we shall fight against them by criticism calculated to produce schism. . . .
In general, then, our contemporary press will continue to convict 
State affairs, religions, incapacities of the goyim, always using the 
most unprincipled expressions in order by every means to lower their 
prestige in the manner which can only be practised by the genius of 
our gifted tribe. . . .
Our kingdom will be an apologia of the divinity Vishnu, in whom
316 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
is found its personification—in our hundred hands will be, one in 
each, the springs of the machinery of social life. We shall see everything without the aid of official police which, in that scope of its 
rights which we elaborated for the use of the goyim, hinders governments from seeing. In our programme one-third of our subjects will 
keep the rest under observation from a sense of duty, on the principle 
of volunteer service to the State. It will then be no disgrace to be a 
spy and informer, but a merit: unfounded denunciations, however, 
will be cruelly punished that there may be no development of abuses 
of this right.
Our agents will be taken from the higher as well as the lower 
ranks of society, from among the administrative class who spend their 
time in amusements, editors, printers and publishers, booksellers, clerks, 
and salesmen, workmen, coachmen, lackeys, etcetera. This body, having 
no rights and not being empowered to take any action on their own 
account, and consequently a police without any power, will only witness 
and report: verification of their reports and arrests will depend upon 
a responsible group of controllers of police affairs, while the actual 
act of arrest will be performed by the gendarmerie and the municipal 
police. Any person not denouncing anything seen or heard concerning 
questions of polity will also be charged with and made responsible 
for concealment, if it be proved that he is guilty of this crime.
Just as nowadays our brethren are obliged at their own risk to 
denounce to the kabal apostates of their own family or members who 
have been noticed doing anything in opposition to the kabal, so in 
our kingdom over all the world it will be obligatory for all our subjects to observe the duty of service to the State in this direction.
Such an organisation will extirpate abuses of authority, of force, 
of bribery, everything in fact which we by our counsels, by our theories of the superhuman rights of man, have introduced into the 
customs of the goyim. . . . But how else were we to procure that 
increase of causes predisposing to disorders in the midst of their 
administration? . . . Among the number of those methods one of the 
most important is—agents for the restoration of order, so placed as to 
have the opportunity in their disintegrating activity of developing and 
displaying their evil inclinations—obstinate self-conceit, irresponsible 
exercise of authority, and, first and foremost, venality.
Chapter 15 Protocols of the Wise Men of Zion • 317
PROTOCOL NO. 18
When it becomes necessary for us to strengthen the strict measures 
of secret defence (the most fatal poison for the prestige of authority) 
we shall arrange a simulation of disorders or some manifestation of 
discontents finding expression through the co-operation of good 
speakers. Round these speakers will assemble all who are sympathetic 
to his utterances. This will give us the pretext for domiciliary perquisitions and surveillance on the part of our servants from among 
the number of the goyim police. . . .
As the majority of conspirators act out of love for the game, for 
the sake of talking, so, until they commit some overt act we shall 
not lay a finger on them but only introduce into their midst observation elements. ... It must be remembered that the prestige of authority is lessened if it frequently discovers conspiracies against itself: 
this implies a presumption of consciousness of weakness, or, what is still 
worse, of injustice. You are aware that we have broken the prestige 
of the goy kings by frequent attempts upon their lives through our 
agents, blind sheep of our flock, who are easily moved by a few 
liberal phrases to crimes provided only they be painted in political 
colours. We have compelled the rulers to acknowledge their weakness 
in advertising overt measures of secret defence and thereby we shall 
bring the promise of authority to destruction.
Our ruler will be secretly protected only by the most insignificant 
guard, because we shall not admit so much as a thought that there 
could exist against him any sedition with which he is not strong 
enough to contend and is compelled to hide from it.
If we should admit this thought, as the goyim have done and are 
doing, we should ipso facto be signing a death sentence, if not for our 
ruler, at any rate for his dynasty, at no distant date.
According to strictly enforced outward appearances our ruler will 
employ his power only for the advantage of the nation and in no 
wise for his own or dynastic profits. Therefore, with the observance of 
this decorum, his authority will be respected and guarded by the 
subjects themselves, it will receive an apotheosis in the admission that 
with it is bound up the well-being of every citizen of the State, for 
upon it will depend all order in the common life of the pack. . . .
318 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
Overt defence of the king argues weakness in the organisation of his 
strength.
Our ruler will always among the people be surrounded by a mob 
of apparently curious men and women, who will occupy the front 
ranks about him, to all appearance by chance, and will restrain the 
ranks of the rest out of respect as it will appear for good order. This 
will sow an example of restraint also in others. If a petitioner appears 
among the people trying to hand a petition and forcing his way 
through the ranks, the first ranks must receive the petition and before 
the eyes of the petitioner pass it to the ruler, so that all may know 
that what is handed in reaches its destination, that, consequently, 
there exists a control of the ruler himself. The aureole of power 
requires for its existence that the people may be able to say: "If the 
king knew of this," or: "the king will hear of it."
With the establishment of official secret defence the mystical prestige 
of authority disappears: given a certain audacity, and everyone counts 
himself master of it, the sedition-monger is conscious of his strength, 
and when occasion serves watches for the moment to make an attempt upon authority. . . . For the goyim we have been preaching 
something else, but by that very fact we are enabled to see what 
measures of overt defence have brought them to. . . .
Criminals with us will be arrested at the first more or less wellgrounded suspicion; it cannot be allowed that out of fear of a possible mistake an opportunity should be given of escape to persons 
suspected of a political lapse or crime, for in these matters we shall be 
literally merciless. If it is still possible, by stretching a point, to admit 
a reconsideration of the motive causes in simple crimes, there is no 
possibility of excuse for persons occupying themselves with questions 
in which nobody except the government can understand anything. . . . 
And it is not all governments that understand true policy.
PROTOCOL NO. 19
If we do not permit any independent dabbling in the political we 
shall on the other hand encourage every kind of report or petition 
with proposals for the government to examine into all kinds of 
projects for the amelioration of the condition of the people; this will 
reveal to us the defects or else the fantasies of our subjects, to which
Chapter 15 Protocols of the Wise Men of Zion • 319
we shall respond either by accomplishing them or by a wise rebutment 
to prove the short-sightedness of one who judges wrongly.
Sedition-mongering is nothing more than the yapping of a lapdog at an elephant. For a government well organised, not from the 
police but from the public point of view, the lap-dog yaps at the 
elephant in entire unconsciousness of its strength and importance. It 
needs no more than to take a good example to show the relative 
importance of both and the lap-dogs will cease to yap and will wag 
their tails the moment they set eyes on an elephant.
In order to destroy the prestige of heroism for political crime we 
shall send it for trial in the category of thieving, murder, and every 
kind of abominable and filthy crime. Public opinion will then confuse 
in its conception this category of crime with the disgrace attaching to 
every other and will brand it with the same contempt.
We have done our best, and I hope we have succeeded, to obtain 
that the goyim should not arrive at this means of contending with 
sedition. It was for this reason that through the press and in speeches, 
indirectly—in cleverly compiled schoolbooks on history, we have 
advertised the martyrdom alleged to have been accepted by seditionmongers for the idea of the commonweal. This advertisement has increased the contingent of liberals and has brought thousands of goyim 
into the ranks of our livestock cattle.
PROTOCOL NO. 20
To-day we shall touch upon the financial programme, which I put 
off to the end of my report as being the most difficult, the crowning 
and the decisive point of our plans. Before entering upon it I will 
remind you that I have already spoken before by way of a hint when 
I said that the sum total of our actions is settled by the question of 
figures.
When we come into our kingdom our autocratic government will 
avoid, from a principle of self-preservation, sensibly burdening the 
masses of the people with taxes, remembering that it plays the part of 
father and protector. But as State organisation costs dear it is necessary nevertheless to obtain the funds required for it. It will, therefore, 
elaborate with particular precaution the question of equilibrium in 
this matter.
320 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
Our rule, in which the king will enjoy the legal fiction that everything in his State belongs to him (which may easily be translated 
into fact), will be enabled to resort to the lawful confiscation of all 
sums of every kind for the regulation of their circulation in the State. 
From this follows that taxation will best be covered by a progressive tax 
on property. In this manner the dues will be paid without straitening 
or ruining anybody in the form of a percentage of the amount of 
property. The rich must be aware that it is their duty to place a part 
of their superfluities at the disposal of the State since the State guarantees them security of possession of the rest of their property and the 
right of honest gains, I say honest, for the control over property will 
do away with robbery on a legal basis.
This social reform must come from above, for the time is ripe for 
it—it is indispensable as a pledge of peace.
The tax upon the poor man is a seed of revolution and works to 
the detriment of the State which in hunting after the trifling is missing 
the big. Quite apart from this, a tax on capitalists diminishes the growth 
of wealth in private hands in which we have in these days concentrated it as a counterpoise to the government strength of the goyim— 
their State finances.
A tax increasing in a percentage ratio to capital will give a much 
larger revenue than the present individual or property tax, which is 
useful to us now for the sole reason that it excites trouble and discontent among the goyim.
The force upon which our king will rest consists in the equilibrium 
and the guarantee of peace, for the sake of which things it is indispensable that the capitalists should yield up a portion of their incomes 
for the sake of the secure working of the machinery of the State. 
State needs must be paid by those who will not feel the burden and 
have enough to take from.
Such a measure will destroy the hatred of the poor man for the 
rich, in whom he will see a necessary financial support for the State, 
will see in him the organiser of peace and well-being since he will 
see that it is the rich man who is paying the necessary means to attain 
these things.
In order that payers of the educated classes should not too much 
distress themselves over the new payments they will have full accounts 
given them of the destination of those payments, with the exception
Chapter 15 Protocols of the Wise Men of Zion • 321
of such sums as will be appropriated for the needs of the throne and 
the administrative institutions.
He who reigns will not have any properties of his own once all 
in the State represents his patrimony, or else the one would be in 
contradiction to the other; the fact of holding private means would 
destroy the right of property in the common possessions of all.
Relatives of him who reigns, his heirs excepted, who will be maintained by the resources of the State, must enter the ranks of servants of 
the State or must work to obtain the right of property; the privilege of 
royal blood must not serve for the spoiling of the treasury.
Purchase, receipt of money or inheritance will be subject to the 
payment of a stamp progressive tax. Any transfer of property, whether 
money or other, without evidence of payment of this tax which will 
be strictly registered by names, will render the former holder liable 
to pay interest on the tax from the moment of transfer of these sums 
up to the discovery of his evasion of declaration of the transfer. 
Transfer documents must be presented weekly at the local treasury 
office with notifications of the name, surname and permanent place of 
residence of the former and the new holder of the property. This 
transfer with register of names must begin from a definite sum which 
exceeds the ordinary expenses of buying and selling of necessaries, 
and these will be subject to payment only by a stamp impost of a 
definite percentage of the unit.
Just strike an estimate of how many times such taxes as these will 
cover the revenue of the goyim States.
The State exchequer will have to maintain a definite complement 
of reserve sums, and all that is collected above that complement must 
be returned into circulation. On these sums will be organised public 
works. The initiative in works of this kind, proceeding from State 
sources, will bind the working class firmly to the interests of the State 
and to those who reign. From these same sums also a part will be set 
aside as rewards of inventiveness and productiveness.
On no account should so much as a single unit above the definite 
and freely estimated sums be retained in the State treasuries, for 
money exists to be circulated and any kind of stagnation of money 
acts ruinously on the running of the State machinery, for which it is 
the lubricant; a stagnation of the lubricant may stop the regular 
working of the mechanism.
322 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE • William Cooper
The substitution of interest-bearing paper for a part of the token 
of exchange has produced exactly this stagnation. The consequences 
of this circumstance are already sufficiently noticeable.
A court of account will also be instituted by us and in it the ruler 
will find at any moment a full accounting for State income and expenditure, with the exception of the current monthly account, not 
yet made up, and that of the preceding month, which will not yet 
have been delivered.
The one and only person who will have no interest in robbing the 
State is its owner, the ruler. This is why his personal control will 
remove the possibility of leakages of extravagances.
The representative function of the ruler at receptions for the sake 
of etiquette, which absorbs so much invaluable time, will be abolished 
in order that the ruler may have time for control and consideration. 
His power will not then be split up into fractional parts among timeserving favourites who surround the throne for its pomp and splendour, 
and are interested only in their own and not in the common interests 
of the State.
Economic crises have been produced by us for the goyim by no 
other means than the withdrawal of money from circulation. Huge 
capitals have stagnated, withdrawing money from States, which were 
constantly obliged to apply to those same stagnant capitals for loans. 
These loans burdened the finances of the State with the payment of 
interest and made them the bond slaves of these capitals. . . . The 
concentration of industry in the hands of capitalists out of the hands of 
small masters has drained away all the juices of the peoples and with 
them also of the States. . . .
The present issue of money in general does not correspond with 
the requirements per head, and cannot therefore satisfy all the needs 
of the workers. The issue of money ought to correspond with the 
growth of population and thereby children also must absolutely be 
reckoned as consumers of currency from the day of their birth. The 
revision of issue is a material question for the whole world.
You are aware that the gold standard has been the ruin of the 
States which adopted it, for it has not been able to satisfy the demands 
for money, the more so that we have removed gold from circulation as 
far as possible.
With us the standard that must be introduced is the cost of working-
Chapter l5 Protocols of the Wise Men of Zion • 323
man power, whether it be reckoned in paper or in wood. We shall 
make the issue of money in accordance with the normal requirements 
of each subject, adding to the quantity with every birth and subtracting with every death.
The accounts will be managed by each department (the French 
administrative division), each circle.
In order that there may be no delays in the paying out of money 
for State needs the sums and terms of such payments will be fixed 
by decree of the ruler; this will do away with the protection by a 
ministry of one institution to the detriment of others.
The budgets of income and expenditure will be carried out side 
by side that they may not be obscured by distance one to another.
The reforms projected by us in the financial institutions and principles of the goyim will be closed by us in such forms as will alarm 
nobody. We shall point out the necessity of reforms in consequence 
of the disorderly darkness into which the goyim by their irregularities 
have plunged the finances. The first irregularity, as we shall point 
out, consists in their beginning with drawing up a single budget which 
year after year grows owing to the following cause: this budget is 
dragged out to half the year, then they demand a budget to put things 
right, and this they expend in three months, after which they ask for 
a supplementary budget, and all this ends with a liquidation budget. 
But, as the budget of the following year is drawn up in accordance with 
the sum of the total addition, the annual departure from the normal 
reaches as much as 50 per cent, in a year, and so the annual budget 
is trebled in ten years. Thanks to such methods, allowed by the carelessness of the goy States, their treasuries are empty. The period of 
loans supervenes, and that has swallowed up remainders and brought 
all the goy States to bankruptcy.
You understand perfectly that economic arrangements of this kind, 
which have been suggested to the goyim by us, cannot be carried on 
by us.
Every kind of loan proves infirmity in the State and a want of 
understanding of the rights of the State. Loans hang like a sword 
of Damocles over the heads of rulers, who, instead of taking from 
their subjects by a temporary tax, come begging with outstretched 
palm of our bankers. Foreign loans are leeches which there is no 
possibility of removing from the body of the State until they fall
324 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
off of themselves or the State flings them off. But the goy States do not 
tear them off; they go on in persisting in putting more on to themselves so that they must inevitably perish, drained by voluntary bloodletting.
What also indeed is, in substance, a loan, especially a foreign loan? 
A loan is—an issue of government bills of exchange containing a 
percentage obligation commensurate to the sum of the loan capital. 
If the loan bears a charge of 5 per cent., then in twenty years the 
State vainly pays away in interest a sum equal to the loan borrowed, 
in forty years it is paying a double sum, in sixty—treble, and all the 
while the debt remains an unpaid debt.
From this calculation it is obvious that with any form of taxation 
per head the State is baling out the last coppers of the poor taxpayers 
in order to settle accounts with wealthy foreigners, from whom it has 
borrowed money instead of collecting these coppers for its own needs 
without the additional interest.
So long as loans were internal the goyim only shuffled their money 
from the pockets of the poor to those of the rich, but when we bought 
up the necessary person in order to transfer loans into the external 
sphere all the wealth of States flowed into our cash-boxes and all the 
goyim began to pay us the tribute of subjects.
If the superficiality of goy kings on their thrones in regard to 
State affairs and the venality of ministers or the want of understanding of financial matters on the part of other ruling persons have 
made their countries debtors to our treasuries to amounts quite impossible to pay it has not been accomplished without on our part heavy 
expenditure of trouble and money.
Stagnation of money will not be allowed by us and therefore 
there will be no State interest-bearing paper, except a one per cent. 
series, so that there will be no payment of interest to leeches that suck 
all the strength out of the State. The right to issue interest-bearing 
paper will be given exclusively to industrial companies who will find 
no difficulty in paying interest out of profits, whereas the State does 
not make interest on borrowed money like these companies, for the 
State borrows to spend and not to use in operations.
Industrial papers will be bought also by the government which 
from being as now a payer of tribute by loan operations will be transformed into a lender of money at a profit. This measure will stop the
Chapter 15 Protocols of the Wise Men of Zion • 325
stagnation of money, parasitic profits and idleness, all of which were 
useful for us among the goyim so long as they were independent but 
are not desirable under our rule.
How clear is the undeveloped power of thought of the 'purely 
brute brains of the goyim, as expressed in the fact that they have been 
borrowing from us with payment of interest without ever thinking that 
all the same these very moneys plus an addition for payment of 
interest must be got by them from their own State pockets in order 
to settle up with us. What could have been simpler than to take the 
money they wanted from their own people?
But it is a proof of the genius of our chosen mind that we have 
contrived to present the matter of loans to them in such a light that 
they have even seen in them an advantage for themselves.
Our accounts, which we shall present when the time comes, in the 
light of centuries of experience gained by experiments made by us 
on the goy States, will be distinguished by clearness and definiteness 
and will show at a glance to all men the advantage of our innovations. 
They will put an end to those abuses to which we owe our mastery 
over the goyim, but which cannot be allowed in our kingdom.
We shall so hedge about our system of accounting that neither the 
ruler nor the most insignificant public servant will be in a position 
to divert even the smallest sum from its destination without detection 
or to direct it in another direction except that which will be once 
fixed in a definite plan of action.
And without a definite plan it is impossible to rule. Marching along 
an undetermined road and with undetermined resources brings to ruin 
by the way heroes and demi-gods.
The goy rulers, whom we once upon a time advised should be distracted from State occupations by representative receptions, observances 
of etiquette, entertainments, were only screens for our rule. The accounts of favourite courtiers who replaced them in the sphere of affairs 
were drawn up for them by our agents, and every time gave satisfaction to short-sighted minds by promises that in the future economies and improvements were foreseen. . . . Economies from what? 
From new taxes?—were questions that might have been but were not 
asked by those who read our accounts and projects. . . .
You know to what they have been brought by this carelessness, to
326 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
what a pitch of financial disorder they have arrived, notwithstanding 
the astonishing industry of their peoples. . . .
PROTOCOL NO. 21
To what I reported to you at the last meeting I shall now add a 
detailed explanation of internal loans. Of foreign loans I shall say 
nothing more, because they have fed us with the national moneys of 
the goyim, but for our State there will be no foreigners, that is, 
nothing external.
We have taken advantage of the venality of administrators and 
the slackness of rulers to get our moneys twice, thrice and more times 
over, by lending to the goy governments moneys which were not at 
all needed by the States. Could anyone do the like in regard to 
us? . . . Therefore, I shall only deal with the details of internal 
loans.
States announce that such a loan is to be concluded and open 
subscriptions for their own bills of exchange, that is, for their interestbearing paper. That they may be within the reach of all the price is 
determined at from a hundred to a thousand; and a discount is made 
for the earliest subscribers. Next day by artificial means the price 
of them goes up, the alleged reason being that everyone is rushing 
to buy them. In a few days the treasury safes are as they say overflowing and there's more money than they can do with (why then 
take it?). The subscription, it is alleged, covers many times over the 
issue total of the loan; in this lies the whole stage effect—look you, 
they say, what confidence is shown in the government's bills of 
exchange.
But when the comedy is played out there emerges the fact that a 
debit and an exceedingly burdensome debit has been created. For the 
payment of interest it becomes necessary to have recourse to new loans, 
which do not swallow up but only add to the capital debt. And when 
this credit is exhausted it becomes necessary by new taxes to cover, not 
the loan, but only the interest on it. These taxes are a debit employed 
to cover a debit. . . .
Later comes the time for conversions, but they diminish the payment 
of interest without covering the debt, and besides they cannot be made
Chapter 15 Protocols of the Wise Men of Zion • 327
without the consent of the lenders; on announcing a conversion a proposal is made to return the money to those who are not willing to 
convert their paper. If everybody expressed his unwillingness and demanded his money back, the government would be hooked on their 
own flies and would be found insolvent and unable to pay the 
proposed sums. By good luck the subjects of the goy governments, 
knowing nothing about financial affairs, have always preferred losses 
on exchange and diminution of interest to the risk of new investments 
of their moneys, and have thereby many a time enabled these governments to throw off their shoulders a debit of several millions.
Nowadays, with external loans, these tricks cannot be played by the 
goyim for they know that we shall demand all our moneys back.
In this way an acknowledged bankruptcy will best prove to the 
various countries the absence of any means between the interests of the 
peoples and of those who rule them.
I beg you to concentrate your particular attention upon this point 
and upon the following: nowadays all internal loans are consolidated 
by so-called flying loans, that is, such as have terms of payment more 
or less near. These debts consist of moneys paid into the savings banks 
and reserve funds. If left for long at the disposition of a government 
these funds evaporate in the payment of interest on foreign loans, and 
are replaced by the deposit of equivalent amount of rentes.
And these last it is which patch up all the leaks in the State treasuries of the goyim.
When we ascend the throne of the world all these financial and 
similar shifts, as being not in accord with our interests, will be swept 
away so as not to leave a trace, as also will be destroyed all money 
markets, since we shall not allow the prestige of our power to be 
shaken by fluctuations of prices set upon our values, which we shall 
announce by law at the price which represents their full worth without 
any possibility of lowering or raising. (Raising gives the pretext for 
lowering, which indeed was where we made a beginning in relation 
to the values of the goyim.)
We shall replace the money markets by grandiose government credit 
institutions, the object of which will be to fix the price of industrial 
values in accordance with government views. These institutions will 
be in a position to fling upon the market five hundred millions of 
industrial paper in one day, or to buy up for the same amount. In this
328 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
way all industrial undertakings will come into dependence upon us. 
You may imagine for yourselves what immense power we shall thereby 
secure for ourselves...
PROTOCOL NO. 22
In all that has so far been reported by me to yon, I have endeavoured 
to depict with care the secret of what is coming, of what is past, and 
of what is going on now, rushing into the flood of the great events 
coming already in the near future, the secret of our relations to the 
goyim and of financial operations. On this subject there remains still 
a little for me to add.
In our hands is the greatest power of our day—gold: in two days 
we can procure from our storehouses any quantity we may please.
Surely there is no need to seek further proof that our rule is predestined by God? Surely we shall not fail with such wealth to prove 
that all that evil which for so many centuries we have had to commit 
has served at the end of ends the cause of true well-being-—the bringing 
of everything into order? Though it be even by the exercise of some 
violence, yet all the same it will be established. We shall contrive to 
prove that we are benefactors who have restored to the rent and 
mangled earth the true good and also freedom of the person, and therewith we shall enable it to be enjoyed in peace and quiet, with proper 
dignity of relations, on the condition, of course, of strict observance 
of the laws established by us. We shall make plain therewith that 
freedom does not consist in dissipation and in the right of unbridled 
licence any more than the dignity and force of a man do not consist 
in the right for everyone to promulgate destructive principles in the 
nature of freedom of conscience, equality and the like, that freedom 
of the person in no wise consists in the right to agitate oneself and 
others by abominable speeches before disorderly mobs, and that true 
freedom consists in the inviolability of the person who honourably 
and strictly observes all the laws of life in common, that human 
dignity is wrapped up in consciousness of the rights and also of the 
absence of rights of each, and not wholly and solely in fantastic 
imaginings about the subject of one's ego.
Our authority will be glorious because it will be all-powerful, will 
rule and guide, and not muddle along after leaders and orators shriek-
Chapter 15 Protocols of the Wise Men of Zion 329
ing themselves hoarse with senseless words which they call great principles and which are nothing else, to speak honestly, but utopian. . . . 
Our authority will be the crown of order, and in that is included the 
whole happiness of man. The aureole of this authority will inspire a 
mystical bowing of the knee before it and a reverent fear before it 
of all the peoples. True force makes no terms with any right, not even 
with that of God: none dare come near to it so as to take so much as a 
span from it away.
PROTOCOL NO. 23
That the peoples may become accustomed to obedience it is necessary 
to inculcate lessons of humility and therefore to reduce the production of articles of luxury. By this we shall improve morals which have 
been debased by emulation in the sphere of luxury. We shall reestablish small master production which will mean laying a mine under 
the private capital of manufacturers. This is indispensable also for 
the reason that manufacturers on the grand scale often move, though 
not always consciously, the thoughts of the masses in directions against 
the government. A people of small masters knows nothing of unemployment and this binds him closely with existing order, and consequently with the firmness of authority. Unemployment is a most 
perilous thing for a government. For us its part will have been played 
out the moment authority is transferred into our hands. Drunkenness 
also will be prohibited by law and punishable as a crime against the 
humanness of man who is turned into a brute under the influence 
of alcohol.
Subjects, I repeat once more, give blind obedience only to the 
strong hand which is absolutely independent of them, for in it they 
feel the sword of defence and support against social scourges. . . . 
What do they want with an angelic spirit in a king? What they have 
to see in him is the personification of force and power.
The supreme lord who will replace all now existing rulers, dragging 
on their existence among societies demoralised by us, societies that 
have denied even the authority of God, from whose midst breaks out 
on all sides the fire of anarchy, must first of all proceed to quench 
this all-devouring flame. Therefore he will be obliged to kill off those 
existing societies, though he should drench them with his own blood,
330 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
that he may resurrect them again in the form of regularly organised 
troops fighting consciously with every kind of infection that may cover 
the body of the State with sores.
This Chosen One of God is chosen from above to demolish the 
senseless forces moved by instinct and not reason, by brutishness and 
not humanness. These forces now triumph in manifestations of robbery 
and every kind of violence under the mask of principles of freedom 
and rights. They have overthrown all forms of social order to erect 
on the ruins the throne of the King of the Jews; but their part will 
be played out the moment he enters into his kingdom. Then it will 
be necessary to sweep them away from his path, on which must be left 
no knot, no splinter.
Then will it be possible for us to say to the peoples of the world: 
"Give thanks to God and bow the knee before him who bears on his 
front the seal of the predestination of man, to which God Himself 
has led his star that none other but He might free us from all the 
before-mentioned forces and evils."
PROTOCOL NO. 24
I pass now to the method of confirming the dynastic roots of King 
David to the last strata of the earth.
This confirmation will first and foremost be included in that in 
which to this day has rested the force of conservatism by our learned 
elders of the conduct of all the affairs of the world, in the directing 
of the education of thought of all humanity.
Certain members of the seed of David will prepare the kings and 
their heirs, selecting not by right of heritage but by eminent capacities, 
inducting them into the most secret mysteries of the political, into 
schemes of government, but providing always that none may come to 
knowledge of the secrets. The object of this mode of action is that all 
may know that government cannot be entrusted to those who have not 
been inducted into the secret places of its art. . . .
To these persons only will be taught the practical application of 
the aforenamed plans by comparison of the experiences of many 
centuries, all the observations on the politico-economic moves and social 
sciences—in a word, all the spirit of laws which have been unshakably
Chapter 15 Protocols of the Wise Men of Zion • 331
established by nature herself for the regulation of the relations of 
humanity.
Direct heirs will often be set aside from ascending the throne if in 
their time of training they exhibit frivolity, softness and other qualities that are the ruin of authority, which render them incapable of 
governing and in themselves dangerous for kingly office.
Only those who are unconditionally capable for firm, even if it be 
to cruelty, direct rule will receive the reins of rule from our learned 
elders.
In case of falling sick with weakness of will or other form of incapacity, kings must by law hand over the reins of rule to new and 
capable hands. . . .
The king's plans of action for the current moment, and all the 
more so for the future, will be unknown, even to those who are called 
his closest counsellors.
Only the king and the three who stood sponsor for him will know 
what is coming.
In the person of the king who with unbending will is master of 
himself and of humanity all will discern as it were fate with its 
mysterious ways. None will know what the king wishes to attain by 
his dispositions, and therefore none will dare to stand across an unknown path.
It is understood that the brain reservoir of the king must correspond 
in capacity to the plan of government it has to contain. It is for this 
reason that he will ascend the throne not otherwise than after examination of his mind by the aforesaid learned elders.
That the people may know and love their king it is indispensable 
for him to converse in the market-places with his people. This ensures 
the necessary clinching of the two forces which are now divided one 
from another by us by the terror.
This terror was indispensable for us till the time comes for both 
these forces separately to fall under our influence.
The King of the Jews must not be at the mercy of his passions, 
and especially of sensuality: on no side of his character must he give 
brute instincts power over his mind. Sensuality worse than all else 
disorganises the capacities of the mind and clearness of views, distracting the thoughts to the worst and most brutal side of human 
activity.
332 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
The prop of humanity in the person of the supreme lord of all the 
world of the holy seed of David must sacrifice to his people all personal inclinations.
Our supreme lord must be of an exemplary irreproachability.



Chapter 16 The Story of Jonathan May

THE STORY OF 
JONATHAN MAY
 Jonathan May attempted to free us from the shackles of the Federal Reserve by 
creating an alternate banking system with instruments backed by land, raw 
materials, mineral deposits, oil, coal, timber, and other wilderness holdings. 
Jonathan aided Governor Connolly and the Hunt brothers in their effort to 
corner the silver market. The silver would have been used to create a "Bank of 
Texas" issue of "real" money. This would have destroyed the Federal Reserve 
had the Hunts been successful. When the world bankers realized what was
 happening, they destroyed Connolly, the Hunt brothers, Jonathan May, and 
Texas. 
The federal Reserve entrapped Mr. May by intentionally routing his credit 
instruments through the Federal Reserve, against the terms clearly stated 
upon those instruments, instead of through Mr. May's alternate system. 
Jonathan May was illegally arrested, illegally tried, and illegally imprisoned 
in the Federal Prison at Terre Haute, Indiana. The world power structure has 
stolen Mr. May's idea, which will be used as the banking system of the New 
World Order and is known as the World Conservation Bank. Jonathan has 
served four years of a fifteen-year sentence.
334 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
Telling Time: July 27, 1990
I SWEAR BY ALMIGHTY GOD THAT THE EVIDENCE I NOW 
GIVE IS THE TRUTH, THE WHOLE TRUTH AND NOTHING BUT 
THE TRUTH, TO THE BEST OF MY KNOWLEDGE, BELIEF AND 
RECOLLECTION. I DO SO SWEAR UNDER THE PENALTY OF 
PERJURY UNDER THE LAWS OF THE UNITED STATES OF 
AMERICA - SO HELP ME GOD.
I was born into a privileged life-style in North 
Devon, England, the third and last child and only son of a 
wealthy, land-owning family. I was privately educated and 
left school early, determined to join my father's business 
and not be encumbered with the authoritarian atmosphere of 
school. I did so by getting myself expelled. I was, I 
believe, nearly sixteen. At once I began to work as a 
livestock broker as ray father and his family did and still 
does. I also farmed. I then branched into other goods, 
buying for customers using ray contacts to supply items at a 
lower cost and better quality items at the same cost than 
normal retail suppliers. I was very successful. My business 
continued to expand. Management was highly vertically 
structured, and diversification was as lateral as I could 
possibly make it. It continued to thrive. I developed a 
sophisticated tax-shelter system which was lawfully capable 
of removing taxation liability from the majority of my own 
and my colleagues' incomes.
At age 20, in my twenty-first year, numerous old 
documents - family heirlooms from my mother's side of the 
family - were given to me as its last remaining male heir.
(Page 1 of 26)
Chapter 16 The Story of Jonathan May • 335
Among these old documents was an Indenture issued to an 
ancestor of mine, settling upon him "and his heir and 
assigns in perpetuity for the duration of the term hereof"
the responsibility and authority of Trustee for certain 
property, goods, chattels, etc. As far as I can recall, the 
document was dated "In this Year of Our Lord one Thousand, 
Six Hundred and Forty Seven". The document - a parchment 
with the Royal Seal of England still attached - constituted 
a Trust indenturing my ancestor, et. al. for a 999-year terra 
as trustee for the property named. The parchment was signed
by "Charles Stuart Rex Of England, France, and Ireland 
King" - Charles I.
Knowing nothing about such matters, I consulted 
lawyers . They determined the document was genuine, that a 
trust had been established by the British King Charles I and 
that its original trustee had been my ancestor, and that - 
as a matter of law - it could not be broken, the British 
monatch then - and still - being the Supreme Head of the 
judiciary in the United Kingdom. Also as a matter of law, 
the trust was an operative entity, under the provisions of 
which I, as the remaining male heir, was the responsible
 trustee. However, it had clearly been inoperative for as 
long as anyone could remember. Shares certified from "The 
Dheli & Punjab Railway" and other such antiquated relics - 
seemingly unredeemed still - were with the trust charter. 
Successive charters endorsed by successive British monarchs 
were with the original one as well. 
It was determined that sub-trusts - subsidiaries - 
should be formed at once, under the grandfathering precepts 
of the original 17th-century charter. Out of the air, I 
decided that 4000 such subsidiaries would be formed as 
(Telling Time. Page 2 of 26)
336 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
non-domiciled entities, governed under the plural and 
simultaneous governments of all the nations of the world 
which were non-Communist.
Between the months of September 19, 1969 and 
February 15, 1970, these 4000 charters were printed and 
recorded in a register. These were numbered, prefixed by 
"No. SSR/647/". The first was chosen to be the common 
trustee entity for the remaining 3,999. None could be 
recorded in any one country. Doing so would have given the 
country of registration some prior-claim taxation ability. 
For this reason, the Register of the 4000 entities was kept 
in the constant custody of myself as the recorded 
sole-signator of record of the original trust which we named 
"The International Equity Trust". We decided to call the 
group of sub-trusts "The Sovereign Charter Trust Group". 
This main group was then subdivided into the Sodalitas Trust 
Group - comprised of the administrative, in-house members 
whose activities were to be coordinated by and through a 
board of directors known as The Trustee's Directorate Body. 
The remaining trusts were to have been sold/leased as 
tax-shelters to sundry third parties for the fee of 20% of 
the total tax liability saved by the client using the trust 
for this purpose, ie. without one of our trusts - a tax 
liability of $100,000, but with one of our trusts - at a 
cost to the client of $20,000 - a nil tax liability.
In 1969, lawyers advised us that the only problem 
we faced was the taxation authorities' propensity to 
arbitrarily state that our trusts were a non-entity but that 
they would be protected from taxation anywhere worldwide by 
legislation once proof positive was available that they had 
been alive as artificial persons for twelve years. My local
(Telling Time,Page 3 of 26)
Chapter 16 The Story of Jonathan May • 337
home-town lawyer had counter-endorsed the Register under 
every page, and the 4000 trusts were "born", ie. chartered 
between September 19, 1969 and February 15, 1970.
Accordingly, I determined that I should continue my business 
enterprises for another twelve years and then simply sell or
lease out the 3,999 trusts at either a flat fee or by the 
20%-of-taxes-saved formula - and use the proceeds, in part, 
to re-determine the what, where, why, and when concerning 
the assets of the original trust.
During the years that followed, I became more and 
more diversified and made sound commercial contacts all over 
the globe. Increasingly, my fees and commissions were being 
paid to me in differing currencies. This brought my 
attention to their differing interest rates and who, in 
fact, it is who determines which currencies are loaned at 
which rates. I discovered that a minute cartel controlled 
all banking policies worldwide, and that the provision or 
non-provision of "money" was all-controlling.
As my reputation as a finder of the unusual at a 
fair price grew, I with my colleagues began to realize that 
there was considerable resistance throughout the 
conventional financial markets to "entrepreneurs". Highly 
determined but very independently-minded individuals were 
not at all welcome in "normal" banking circles. There was a 
very real need in the independent business communities 
throughout the world for alternative credit facilities to 
properly and fairly provide for entrepreneurial needs - a 
window in the market for them between new venture capital 
and died-in-the-wool conventional business capital. We 
decided that, in a wholly novel and independent manner, our 
loosely connected but highly respected circle of
(Telling Time , Page 4 of 26)
338 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
"middle-men" would become providers of capital for our 
established clients all over the world. Independent 
credit/capital sources in the Middle East and elsewhere, and 
several substantial private placement arrangements were 
made, first between ourselves and our investors and 
subsequently between ourselves and the users of those 
investments. We chose to take a minimal intermediary fee 
but retain a non-working but joint-venture/profit-sharing 
interest in many of the enterprises capitalized by our 
investors. We did find that there were never enough 
investors to be found. Otherwise, everyone seemed content.
Like many arrogant and foolish young men before 
me, I tended to advertise my financial success. I grew 
headstrong. The local small town police force began to 
watch me and became a significant nuisance, stopping me for 
tires, speeding, etc., etc. I started a butcher business 
and again made a significant success of it, also in my 
hometown area. My success meant the loss of trade by my 
competition. My premises were burgled successively, and 
soon insurers would not insure me. I provided my own 
deterrent. I rigged a "loaded shotgun" sign outside of my 
premises and inside the coldstore placed a very lifelike 
loaded shotgun and trip alarm system for anyone thinking of 
again stealing my property as uninsured thousands had 
already been stolen. The local police arrested me for 
setting a man-trap with intent to endanger life. My intent, 
quite obviously, was to protect my property, so I was very 
properly acquitted of this foolish charge against me.
Having been advised not to rig up any such device 
again, I purchased a young mountain lion as a "guard dog" to 
continue to dissuade any would-be thieves. With 20-20
(Telling Time, Page 5 of 26)
Chapter 16 The Story of Jonathan May • 339
hindsight I realize that was not an appropriate thing to do.
I began to be a minor celebrity in my little country town, 
and the local police were thoroughly incensed that the 
charges against me had been dropped. I had become something
of a target. My "high profile" was not working for me. By
this time, because of my motoring offenses and the publicity 
resulting from the trial and the mountain lion, my family
all but disowned me. I made it my business to establish 
exactly who it was in the local police force who was 
instigating my problems. It was no lesser man than Inspector
Goldsworthy. I hired people to watch his activities and it
came out that he was involved with drug importing.
The information supplied to me was that 
Goldsworthy had an aged mother in Plymouth, England whom he 
used as an excuse to make frequent trips there from North
Devon, but in fact he was met there by individuals who were 
del i v e r i n g illegal drugs to him. There was no way of
establishing for certain if such was the case. The people I
had been paying to follow him were not professionals. I 
felt it was time to hand the matter over into professional 
hands though, and I did so. Almost at once this particular 
inspector left the North Devon area.
Word came back to me from different sources, 
probably the result of one of the two people I had employed 
to follow Goldsworthy talking carelessly, that Goldsworthy's 
subordinates on the local police force were going to get 
even. The harassment grew to overwhelming proportions. For 
example, a hunting trip with authorized shotguns locked in
my car under a blanket in the backseat became "having a 
loaded shotgun in a public place". Was one of my guns left 
loaded? It would have been a first and only time. Can the
(Telling Time. Page 6 of 26)
340 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
inside of my locked car be a "public place"? But my car was 
in a public car park, so the court upheld the conviction.
The next two experiences originated with a 
"friend" who subsequently admitted to me that he had agreed 
to doing two things in return for not being prosecuted by 
the same local police force. He sold me a dinghy and gave 
me a pair of boots. Both were stolen property and I was 
convicted of stealing and receiving them respectively. 
Fines were imposed. I realized finally that I had no 
prospect of leading a civilized life in my birthplace, so I 
left the U.K. and came to the U.S. to try to establish a 
new, unsullied life.
Between 1980-4, I simply made contacts and 
conducted no business beyond consultancy. I generated 
little money for myself. I lived for the most part on the 
money I'd made in Europe during the '70's.
I was in the process of suing my local bank 
manager and Mssrs. Barclays' Bank for multiple 
contraventions of The Banking Act when I left England. One 
of the "enemies" I'd made in England was a solicitor who has 
given me very bad advice and then had the effrontery to 
charge me for it. He was a close friend of ray local bank 
manager. During my absence from England he sent me a bill 
for about $2000 - a final demand - and then obtained a 
judgement order and a personal bankruptcy order - all 
without ray knowledge until I returned some five months 
later. I am certain it was done to thwart ray lawsuit 
against Mssrs. Barclays' Bank. In England, once adjudged 
bankrupt, one may not sustain any lawsuits at all. I
(Telling Time, Page 7 of 26)
Chapter 16 The Story of Jonathan May • 341
immediately left England again and rearranged all my assets 
so that I was not in violation of the U.K. bankruptcy laws. 
I also obtained a U.S. Visa for Business Purposes.
In 1983 or 1984., the Trustee of The Sovereign 
Charter Trust Group was recorded as a client of the Oklahoma 
Trust Company, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, Rand Everest -
C.E.0. It had become necessary to become more visible 
within the U.S. Little if any business was done with 
Oklahoma, save using it as a depository for some of the
Sodalitas Trust Group's Private Placement Commercial Paper.
Outside of the jurisdiction of The Securities 
Exchange Commission, exclusively upon a private placement 
basis, The International Equity Trust began at this time to 
place its paper in commercial situations worldwide.
Professional third-party geologists determined by
 core -testing that the actual assayed content of nine 
sections of gold/silver-containing properties "conveyed, 
bartered, and assigned unseverably" to the Sovereign Charter 
Trust Group in 1980-1 consistently down to the assayed depth 
of 160 feet - was a minimum of one half ounce of gold per 
tonne (cubic yard) and up to 10 ounces of silver per tonne 
(cubic yard) over the entire nine square miles and beyond. 
Geological surveys confirmed that these properties and the 
acreage adjoining had once been a significantly large lake 
fed by numerous streams from the Rocky Mountains. Over the 
millennia, considerable quantities of gold and silver had 
been washed down to the lakebed. 
Under the Equal Rights Doctrine - the very 
cornerstone of the national heritage of the United States of 
(Telling Time, Page 8 of 26)
342 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
America - with these nine square miles' worth of gold and 
silver deposits, The Sovereign Charter Trust Group was 
endowed with a very considerable portfolio of assets. The 
determination was made that the physical worth of those 
assets, congruent to and parallel to comparable entities in 
the public sector, would be used via the production of 
commercial private placement paper to generate liquidity of 
a sufficiency to establish the wholly independent credit 
facility needed throughout the secondary financial market to 
fill the "middlemen's window" in that market. Between 
1982-3 and 1985-6 a considerable volume of face-value 
long-term maturity paper - private placement "Prime Capital 
Notes" was issued by the International Equity Trust for and 
on behalf of the seven trusts which owned the aforesaid gold 
and silver deposits.
An ultra-conservative system of checks and 
balances was instituted by the Directorate Members of The 
International Equity Trust under the chairmanship and C.E.O. 
authority of the undersigned. Further applying the Equal 
Rights Doctrine of the United States to our private 
placement policy, I and my colleagues determined that in 
order to properly reflect the value of the gold and silver 
we had acquired it was necessary to establish a minimum 
possible value and use it as our represented maximum 
benchmark. This way, there could never be any question of 
misrepresentation instituted against us. In order to 
further insulate ourselves from any such charge, we 
determined that our "paper" was to present itself only upon 
a private placement basis throughout its "life" in the 
secondary markets. Both safety features were built into our 
private placement issue of paper as irrevocable and 
unconditional prerequisites of its issue.
(Telling Time, Page 9 of 26)
Chapter l6 The Story of Jonathan May • 343
The International Equity Trust, in its capacity as 
plenipotentiarial fiduciary trustee for The Sodalitas Trust 
Group (the administrative in-house members of The Sovereign 
Charter Trust Group) was and is the only authorized issuer 
of the group's Private Placement Prime Capital Notes. Such 
issue may not occur in any circumstance, save and except 
that the seven asset-owning trusts into whose custodial 
possession the group assets are placed all independently 
agree, each through their sole guardian/signator(s), that 
such Issuance is appropriate and acceptable. Such 
independently-arrived-at and mandatorily unanimous agreement
 to so issue must be confirmed in writing by each of the 
seven trusts' sole guardian/signator(s) of record and issued 
to The International Equity Trust in Official Memorandum 
format before such private placement paper may be issued. 
The circumstance of issuance was so made properly 
accountable.
The face value of the paper was likewise properly 
and strictly controlled. The Sovereign Charter Trust 
Group's asset base - initially the aforesaid gold and silver 
deposits and subsequently also real property comprising over 
517,000 acres (surface and minerals) would and shall never, 
under the terras of the unseverable policy of The Sovereign 
Charter Trust Group's senior administrative decision-making 
body The Governing Chapter, be encumbered by debt beyond a 
one quarter volume. That means that for each certified $100 
of the asset base no more than $25 of face-value private 
placement paper may be in existence. The reasoning behind 
this very conservative policy was and is that the ultimate 
credit facility which was being prepared for in the early 
'80's with this issuance of paper and the accumulation of 
assets. was never to find itself over-extended. An
(Telling Time, Page 10 of 26)
344 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
unquestioned and unquestionable safety feature ever present 
within each facet of the new facility was that thus none of 
its component parts would ever be in a position of 
insolvency.
For administrative purposes, three differently 
captioned documentary instruments were used. Each was a 
Private Placement Promissory Note. Each constituted a Zero 
Coupon instrument, ie. a promise to pay a final due-date 
figure in the future comprised of both the principal sum and 
the interest thereon accrued. All three instruments were I 
referred to as "Prime Capital Notes" but one was also called 
a "Bill of Exchange", one a "Notice of Acceptance", and one 
as far as I can remember an "Indenture". "Bills of Exchange 
were used when the recipient's business need was simply to 
increase their asset base now in exchange for equity in such 
business in perpetuity. "Notices of Acceptance" were used 
in situations where the recipient's business need was both 
to increase their asset base and to become affiliated with a 
or a member within The Sovereign Charter Trust Group by 
placing such business and/or its owners within the frameword 
of one of the group's trusts. "Indentures" were used 
exclusively on an in-house basis among the various members, 
associates, and affiliates of the Sodalitas Trust Group.
************ 
The formula determined upon by The Directorate 
Body of Trustees was as follows:
Asset Base 100 - Paper Liability Maximum Aggregate @25 = AAA
Asset Base 100 - Paper Liability Maximum Aggregate @33 = AA
Asset Base 100 - Paper Liability Maximum Aggregate @50 = A
Asset Base 100 - Paper Liability Maximum Aggregate @66 = D.
(Telling Time, Page 11 of 26)
Chapter 16 The Story of Jonathan May . 345
The private rating of our associate and affiliate 
business entities began at the beginning of 1986. Our own 
group's paper was mandated by Group Policy as determined by 
the Governing Chapter never to exceed an exposure factor of 
25% of the group's in-house assets, ie. the assets owned by 
the Sodalitas Trust Group's seven Primary Members, and was 
accordingly qualified by our International Finance Counsel 
Ltd. as a Private Placement AAA rated Promissory Note.
In 1984, one portion of our gold reserves was
 exchanged in an Asset Barter-Exchange Agreement with the 
sole surviving owner of over 517,000 acres of real property 
(surface and mineral). The Group's acquisition of such 
property was made unseverable under the provisions of 
Article I - Section 10, Clause i of The U.S. Constitution. 
After such acquisition, the net worth of the Sodalitas Trust 
Group by and through said seven Primary Grade I Member 
trusts was estimated as follows: 
(Note: Some further eleven sections of the same gold-bearing 
property was being disputed at the time and therefore not 
counted, although a defendable title thereto was and is
held.) 
1. Nine (9) Sections (square miles) x 640 acres x 4840 
square yards per acre x 53 yards (the 160-foot depth) = 
1,477,555,200 cubic yards. 
2. 1,477,555,200 cubic yards x 1/2 ounce = 738,777,600 ounces 
of gold in the 9 square miles. 
3. 738,777,600 ounces - 6,000,000 assigned in exchange for 
the 517,000 acres = 732,777,600 ounces of gold. 
(Telling Time, Page 12 of 26)
346 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
4. 732,777,600 @ - say - $250 per ounce = $183,194,400,000. 
517,000 acres @ - say - $500 per acre = $ 258,500,000. 
1,100,000 High Grade low sulphur coal
at - say - $10 per ............. = $ 11,000,000,000.
(Oil, gas, and timber reserves not reckoned)
-----------------------------------------------------------
$194,452,900,000 
By June 18, 1986, liabilities 
outstanding, inclusive of Notes c/s at 
$12-$13Billion, was approximately ...... $ 14,375,000,000
-------------------------------------------------------------
$180,077,900,000.
On this basis I made representations to parties before
June 18, 1986 that The International Equity Trust controlled
assets "in excess of $152 Billion". It did, and it still 
does.
This report concerns those assets' ability to 
properly reinstate the power and authority of Congress to 
govern without deference to those to whom it presently owes 
the National Debt and its life.
On June 18, 1986, at the invitation of Attorney 
Ms. Wendy Alison Nora (an ex-Recorder who had been forced to 
resign from her position in the State of Wisconsin according 
to her subsequent disclosure to me) for and on behalf of 
"not less than 40" of the Sovereign Charter Trust Group's 
trusts - including the seven who own the nine square miles 
of gold and silver reserves and the 517,000 acres - The 
International Equity Trust purchased The Lac Qui Parle
(Telling Time, Page 13 of 26)
Chapter 16 The Story of Jonathan May • 347
Bancorporation, Inc. Said entity was and is authorized 
under Section 225.4 et. seq. of 12 CFR to "act as a bank - 
buy and sell securities - underwrite insurance - municipal 
bonds and commercial paper," etc. This Holding Company 
owned and owns a financial entity named The State Bank of 
Boyd. Technically, The State Bank of Boyd (Minnesota) was 
declared closed as a bank by The Federal Reserve System in 
1984. On March 31, 1986, The Minnesota State Supreme Court 
ruled that The State Bank of Boyd was not in liquidation nor 
in bankruptcy, but rather that its assets and liabilities
 only had been sold to the Bank of Madison - which later 
changed its name to The Lac Qui Parle Bank. (Note: NOT to 
be confused with The Lac Qui Parle Bancorporation, Inc.) 
Highly unconventionally but not unlawfully, as 
soon as we purchased The Lac Qui Parle Bancorporation, Inc. 
(ours), it was the recipient of a Sodalitas Trust Group's 
Promissory Note, due and payable (from memory) on August 1, 
1999, in a figure of $2,000,000,000 with a minimum yield 
factor included therein (a Zero Coupon Note) which provided 
a then current value of approximately $1,672,000. A part of 
the acquisition contract whereby The International Equity 
Trust purchased the Holding Company and its wholly-owned 
subsidiary The State Bank of Boyd was that, under the 
aforesaid provisions of 12 CFR Section 225.4 et. seq. , the 
Holding Company at once and thereby extended a 
$1,200,000,000 line of credit to the subsidiary under the 
strict understanding that said subsidiary was under the 
direct supervision of its parent entity The Lac Qui Parle 
Bancorporation, Inc. by and through its owners' Trustee, The 
International Equity Trust. The first and foremost 
directive was that The State Bank of Boyd enjoyed a strictly 
limited authorization, ONLY AS THE SERVICE AGENT OF
(Telling Time, Page 14 of 26)
348 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Coopper
ITS PARENT, to extend credit ONLY UP TO AN AGGREGATE 
FIGURE OF 87 1/2% (7/8ths) of the credit extended to it by its 
parent, ie. $1,050,000,000 of the $1,200,000,000.
The State Bank of Boyd WAS closed down as a bank. 
It was not a non-viable corporate entity. It was not 
"defunct". It did not have a banking charter despite the 
fact that Attorney Nora confirmed to The Minnesota State 
Commissioner of Commerce that she took the legal position 
that "it was in our possession constructively as a matter of 
law". I took the position that, since the purpose of The 
Sovereign Charter Trust Group's acquisition of The Lac Qui 
Parle Bancorporation was primarily to outwit and outmaneuver 
the private owners of the Federal Reserve System and to 
provide an alternative credit system for the peoples and 
governments of the world - OUTSIDE of their manipulative 
controlled climate, we would NOT presume to overtly 
contravene the Minnesota State Banking authorities but 
rather, use the State Bank of Boyd in its ONLY corporate 
status as the SERVICE AGENT for The Lac Qui Parle 
Bancorporation, Inc., which was itself authorized by 
legislation to "Act as a Bank".
The alternative credit facility which was 
presented to the Directorate Body of The International 
Equity Trust by our "think-tank" was, in ray estimation, 
nothing short of brilliant. After some deliberation, we 
decided to refer to our new, copyrighted system as "The 
Reconomy System".
The Reconomy System is comprised of a series of 
individual self-help, socio-economic programs. As far as my 
memory serves me, a total of 170 different programs were
(Telling Time, Page 15 of 26)
Chapter 16 The Story of Jonathan May • 349
developed. The Reconomy Program restricts itself to two 
separate functions. One is the provision of interest-exempt 
credit facilities for private business users. The other is 
the provision of limited non-repayable grant facilities for 
what we chose to regard as "Critical Need" areas of society, 
eg. the homeless, drug and alcohol abuse victims, low-income 
students, and schools and universities which receive no 
Federal funds. These were and are national programs.
During the late summer of 1985, The International
 Equity Trust was approached by a few of the debtor nations. 
They were complaining bitterly that the owners of the banks, 
particularly in the U.S., to which their countries were 
indebted, through the International Monetary Fund were 
calling for revisions and amendments to those nations' 
constitutions, the better to accommodate the corporate 
associates of those bank-owners in those corporations' 
designs to establish operations within the nations 
concerned. 
For those of you who are not aware, it is 
generally agreed within informed circles that the Presidency 
of James Earl Carter was orchestrated and primarily paid-for 
in campaign funds by various "inner circle" members of the 
Trilateral Commission. After the effective power and 
authority of The Federal Reserve System was shifted from a 
Washington, DC Board of Directors to the so-called 
"independent" shareholders of the twelve regional Federal 
Reserve Banks - the voting shareholders of which in 
controlling proportion are all "coincidentally" members of 
The Trilateral Commission - Jimmy Carter endorsed Paul 
Volker's "Fractional Reserve Lending" policy. It alone 
became the root cause of the inflation-recession and 
(Telling Time, Page 16 of 26)
350 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
asset/gross sales-collateral cycles which - if you examine 
the statistics - are orchestrated in four yearly trends. 
Fractional reserve lending, an exclusive ability of only 
Federal Reserve member institutions, is wholly and solely 
responsible for the fact that the nation's money supply in 
circulation is in fact comprised of over 97% credit for 
which nowhere on earth has there ever existed the printed 
currency equivalent.
It was fractional reserve lending which was 
swiftly instituted immediately before high-ranking U.S. 
government officials persuaded the Nigerian Prime Minister 
to increase the price of Nigerian Crude Oil which he did, 
immediately prior to losing his life in a coup which was 
orchestrated by U.S. covert para-military personnel trained 
in Belize (then British Honduras). The Nigerian Prime 
Minister's life lasted "coincidentally" until the U.S 
officials had flown on to Kuwait and persuaded its oil 
producers to sell their oil at the inflated price of $30 per 
barrel.
Why were these astute U.S. emissaries prepared to 
purchase the Arabs' oil at this hugely inflated price? The 
answer is both awesome and terrifying. U.S. government 
officials were prepared and authorized to agree to purchase 
the oil from the Persian Gulf states and the United Arab 
Emirates upon two seemingly innocuous conditions. The first 
condition was that O.P.E.C. - which was to have so much 
anti-Arab propaganda spewed up against it later - was to 
become a reality and insist that all oil sales worldwide 
were in the future to be dollar-denominated. The second and 
more sinister condition foisted upon the unsuspecting Arabs 
was the the U.S. oil companies purchasing the crude would
(Telling Time, Page 17 Of 26)
Chapter 16 The Story of Jonathan May • 351
not remit the sales proceeds back to the Middle East. 
Rather, the Arabs were invited as a prerequisite of sale at 
the inflated price to purchase long-term, 20 and 30-year 
Certificates of Deposit locked into their depositor banks.
(Note: Readers are strongly invited to investigate, as did 
investigators within our Group, the "coincidental" 
relationships between the owner-controllers of the
purchasing oil companies and the owner-controllers of the 
banks from which the Arabs "chose" to purchase their 20 and 
30-year C.D.'s)
■
In simplest terms, what IS this "fractional 
reserve lending"? As evidenced by the fact that the money
 in circulation cannot be matched with currency in existence 
save in a negative ratio of about 6 6 . 6 to 1, it is fraud. 
Can YOU lend anyone $1 if 66.6c of it has never been coined?
The answer is "yes" if you are a member of The Federal 
Reserve System and not a humble licensee.
In order to evaluate the extent of the fraud of
 fractional reserve lending as a matter of law, it is time to 
examine the corruption practiced against "We the People" of 
the U.S. as a result of its operation. Let us look at a 
tiny example of the O.P.E.C./U.S. Prime Bank scenario: 
An oil company issues a check for $lMillion to an 
Arab seller's stateside agent. The figures are crossed out 
of the oil company's account at, say, Chase Manhattan and 
inserted into a 30-year Certificate of Deposit in the Arab's 
name on the computer. The Arab has been paid. Who then 
owns Standard Oil? Who then owns Chase Manhattan?
(Telling Time. Page 18 of 26)
352 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
What happens next? The crude is refined. The 
costs and profits are passed on to the U.S. public. "That 
dirty Arab Cartel" is blamed. But at $2 per gallon it is 
the oil company's account which receives the revenue.
Meanwhile, what is happening to that Arab's 
account? It shows $lMillion. In fact the bank in our 
example, Chase Manhattan, has deposited that $lMillion - a 
piece of paper with $lMillion written on it - to The Federal 
Reserve Clearing System which "pursuant to Fractional 
Reserve Lending Policy" authorizes Chase Manhattan to loan 
at "x60" SIXTY MILLION to Mexico, Brazil, the U.S. Congress 
- whomever it pleases - promulgating the overwhelming 
falsehood that there is too much currency in the market and 
not enough borrowers.
Concurrently, the U.S. Congress purportedly owes 
approximately $65Million per week for the next 2000 years 
providing that as of now not one further dime is ever spent 
and there is a 2000-year moratorium on all interest charges 
to Congress. Its second is the United Arab Emirates being 
paid about 7% per $lMillion in oil revenue.
And those trusted pillars of society The Federal 
Reserve Members - for every $lMillion recorded due in about 
25 years to the Arab - has the burden of paying that Arab 
about $70,000 per year and is only making from the White 
House a STAGGERING $6Million per year and REQUIRING at the 
same time $60Million per year as repayment because of 
Trilateral originated policy issued by Congress.
We owe this all to the kind fiscal servants of 
America and her People. In 1912 $400,000,000 was owed to
( Telling Time, Page 19 Of 26)
Chapter 16 The Story of Jonathan May • 353
Congress and today $6,500,000,000,000 is owed by Congress!
A radical I am not. A one-time farmer and 
now-forever-branded-criminal - permanently humbled in awe of 
the extent of the above-evidenced megalomania, I am.
*****************
I terminated my business in England in about 1978. 
Soon afterwards, I was terminated from being an individual 
with whom anyone could conduct business in England, as a 
result of the warped and crippled mind of a banker and his
stooge. I was invited to America by American strangers from 
Texas. They have their own horror stories to tell. They 
never will. Their lives are at stake. Suffice it to say 
that they, Mr. John Connelly (since bankrupted), Governor 
Clemence (now about to be ousted by the same force), the 
Shah of Iran (whose illness became authentic only after
a r r i v i n g in protective custody at a U.S. Airforce base), a 
German banker (also assassinated by persons trained in 
British Honduras) and an Austrian industrialist (now
pronounced insane) - were all involved in the silver fiasco. 
Why? To properly authenticate Texan and U.S. currency - 
backed with 371 1/4 grains of silver per ounce as the
unrepealed Money-of-Account laws decree. I learned these 
true horror stories after I had rejoiced in my
 now-proven-to-have-been-assinine belief in the U.S. 
Constitution.
On June 18, 1986, in my recorded capacity as sole 
Signator of Record for The International Equity Trust in its 
lawful capacity a sole Trustee of Record for the 3,999 other 
trusts - grandfathered under and as sub-trusts of an
(Telling Time, Page 20 of 26)
354 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
authentic trust established when only the law of 
force-of-arms existed on the North American continent, 
trusts which wholly supersede taxation ANYWHERE, I signed an 
agreement constituting "Obligations of Contract". I knew 
they could not be impaired. Article I, Section 10, Clause i 
of YOUR Constitution decrees it. The International Equity 
Trust so purchased that Bank Holding Company "authorized to 
extend credit nationally and internationally" NOT for itself 
but for 40 trusts - none of the other 39 of which had any 
idea that the others were likewise buying - thereby 
defeating The Federal Reserve's controlling policy to obtain 
its permission to so purchase. One of those 40 trusts was 
The Sovereign Trust of North America. As a matter of public 
record recorded under the provisions of Article IV, Section 
1 which mandates such fact to be given full faith and 
credit, the beneficiaries of The Sovereign Trust of North 
America include the U.S. Congress, each State of the Union's 
governments, and the Body Politic - "We the People of the 
United States." Other trusts' beneficiaries are other 
non-Communist governments.
(Note: Please examine Public Records numbered 2401094 and 
2406534 in Ramsey County, Minnesota - about 300 pages. IF 
you are told that no such record exists, please contact the 
undersigned who will inform you where preserved, certified 
copies thereof are located.)
A Declaratory Statement, dated between June 18, 
1986 and July 3, 1986 was sent to Mr. Paul Volker, then 
Chairman of The Board of Directors of The Federal Reserve 
System. In it, issued and signed by me in my capacity 
aforesaid, I disclosed to him that our group had allocated a 
quantum of $500,000,000 per U.S. State for the
(Telling Time, Page 21 of 26)
Chapter 16 The Story of Jonathan May • 355
implementation of our United States Reconomy System - not as 
a competitor per se but rather as a sophisticated 
alternative credit source whose purpose was entirely limited 
to its prospective outlets. The phone number of Attorney 
Nora was enclosed with a clear and unequivocal request to 
contact us in the event that our Program was in any way in 
contravention of the Constitution and laws made on pursuance 
thereto in that it relied for its authenticity upon the same 
laws which permitted The Federal Reserve to enforce its
policies - because our Holding Company was in part owned by 
the U.S. This constituted it as an independent Agent of the 
United States under Title 18 USC, Section 6. We 
unconditionally covenanted to Congress an equity 
participation of a minimum of $750,000,000 per month, to 
each State an anticipated $40,000,000, a certain $35,000,000 
per month, and to the Body Politic "We the People" upon a 
state by state basis about $150,000,000 per month. The 
balance of the income generated monthly save 5% operating 
expenses and a 10% fee belonged in perpetuity to the 
investors, whose assets backed our facility in a minimum 
ratio in our favor of "x3" in assets and "x8/7ths" in terms 
of our 12 CFR, Section 225.4-authorized U.S. Bank Holding 
Company's service agents' maximum possible liabilities.
On June 19, 1986, having so purchased The Lac Qui 
Parle Bancorporation out of the future control of The 
Federal Reserve System, in order to shore up its status as 
an authorized U.S. Bank Holding Company, another banking
entity owned by The International Equity Trust was assigned 
under The Lac Qui Parle Bancorporation, Inc.'s ownership.
A certain amount of "cash" had been set aside to 
cover the "float". The assets had been duly assigned. The
(Telling Time, Page 22 of 26)
356 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
law was clear that we were authorized. Paul Volker had noz 
come back to us within the ten days under the law of laches 
which I had invoked in ray letter. Unconventional or not, 
we were in business.
Certain of our customers were approved for 
immediate credit lines. Certain of our operatives were 
appointed as Regional Directors over a five-state area each 
endowed with the responsibility to open ten offices per 
State. Each was provided with an interest pre-paid credit 
line of $50,000,000. Acting Service Agent, first tier 
retailer for The Lac Qui Parle Bancorporation's 
credit-extending enterprise, the subsidiary The State Bank 
of Boyd, in its own right, also enjoyed a new credit line of 
$1,200,000 but was obligated not to extend more than "x7/8" 
($1,050,000) to insulate itself from insolvency.
With the knowledge that checks are not 
"securities" as so decreed in the Securities and Exchange 
Act - an act made in pursuance to the Constitution and 
hence, under Article VI supreme in its force and effect - 
Attorney Nora ordered cashiers' checks and personalized 
checks from the appropriate printers for The State Bank of 
Boyd. She and I both knew and later re-confirmed at my 
trial that there exists no legislation which prohibits 
anyone or any corporation from issuing its own cashiers' 
checks per se. Unconventional without a doubt but unlawful 
- no. We both also knew that the only restriction in terms 
of The State Bank of Boyd's activities as a non-bank was 
that it was physically without its Banking Charter but, as 
re-confirmed at trial, the only additional ability such a 
charter grants its corporate owner is the authority to take 
deposits. Neither The Reconomy System nor any of its 170
(Telling Time, Page 23 of 26)
Chapter 16 The Story of Jonathan May • 357
programs engages any of its variously tiered 
instrumentalities in any deposit-taking activity. Reconomy
is an entirely restructured socio-economic equation.
On July 3, 1986, in the absence of jurisdiction, 
i n the absence of a valid arrest warrant, in the absolute 
absence ae a matter of law of any crime, I was arrested in 
Georgia for "Interstate Transportation of falsely made 
securities". The "securities" in question, the ONLY 
securities made the subject-matter of the charges against 
me, were the State Bank of Lloyd checks - each one of which 
was appropriately stamped on the reverse side to be 
priv a t e l y cleared outside of The Federal Reserve System.
Contrary to Congressional legislation, I was given 
no extradition hearing but was held in Georgia for my 
removal to Minnesota for arraignment.
My arraignment took place contrary to legislated 
time limit prescriptions. I was also denied counsel of my 
CHOICE.
My "trial" did not take place within the statutory 
maximum 90 days of my continued incarceration from July 3, 
1986. I was denied permissi on to have witnesses. My 
subpoena demands were ignored. Exculpating evidence was 
precluded. When I attempted to fire my mandatory Public 
Defender to better conduct the remainder of my trial myself, 
I was denied.
No one would have - no one could have lost when it 
was OUR assets at risk, backing OUR credit, being extended
(Telling Time, Page 24 of 26)
in direct accordance with Congressionally-instituted 
legislation and in compliance with 12 CFR, Section 225.4 et. 
seq. When I pointed this out in court and demanded that it 
be produced, the court refused.
It was clear I was to be jailed. My "crimes" were 
my foolishness in believing the U.S. Constitution's 
guarantee of my innocence and my right to equal commercial 
ability and protection - and, clearly, my arrogance in 
believing that such Constitutional provisions would provide 
sufficient protection against the now-obviously-corrupted 
instruments of The U.S. Judicial System.
I am a British citizen. I am not a juridical 
resident of D.C. under 26 USC Section 7701 (A)(39) or 
otherwise. The United Nations Convention implements 
Congressional GUARANTEE unto my government that I shall 
enjoy the full weight of the protection of the laws of the 
United States. Instead, well beyond the purview of any 
legislative authority, I was subjected in an Admiralty 
jurisdictionary Article I Tribunal called "United States 
District Court" - no Constitutionally proper district court 
of the United States - to a trial for an invented "crime" 
that is legislatively impossible to commit. Mr. Harbour, 
the U.S. Probation Service Congressional delegate, made a 
"mistake" with ray sentencing guidelines which should have 
been worst-possible-case 14-18 months. He instead provided 
the court with a 52-64 month range. Given the judge's 
appointment by Trilateral President Carter and relationship 
to the Federal Reserve Director, the court quite 
"appropriately" sentenced me to TEN YEARS in prison - not to 
protect the People but to protect The Federal Reserve's 
fraud against the People!! I SO PUBLICLY ACCUSE!!
(Telling Time, Page 25 of 26)
Chapter 16 The Story of Jonathan May • 359
During the past four years of this sentence, 
evidence upon evidence of civil and criminal conspiracy has 
been presented to such lofty persons as Senator Joseph 
Biden, the Attorney General, The Inspector General, and 
more - to no avail, save continued and continuing abuse of 
process and overt falsehoods being made part of court 
records - proven to be false by conflicting U.S. government 
agency source records. Where - to whom - can one turn to 
regain - as a Human Right, a Civil Right, and both a 
Constitutional and N.A.T.O-instituted Right - my freedom?
NEVER was there intent to defraud - ONLY, EVER to 
wrest from the chains of debt a suffocating government and 
her people.
I SO SWEAR, TO THE ABSOLUTE BEST OF MY KNOWLEDGE 
BELIEF AND RECOLLECTION: THE FOREGOING IS THE 
UNADULTERATED TRUTH.
(Telling Time, Page 26 of 26)
360 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
The foregoing, entitled "Telling Time" was duly served by 
certified mail postage prepaid upon:
1. Senator Thurmon
2. Senator Graham 
3. Senator Helms 
4. Congressman Crane
5. Congressman Hefner
at their respective addresses on Capitol Hill 
this 30th Day of July, 1990.


Chapter 17 Documentation: U.S. Army Intelligence Connection with Satanic Church

Chapter 17
DOCUMENTATION: U.S. ARMY INTELLIGENCE 
CONNECTION WITH SATANIC CHURCH
362 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
Chapter 17 U.S. Army Intelligence Connection with Satanic Church • 363
364 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
Chapter 17 U.S. Army Intelligence Connection with Satanic Church • 365
366 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
Chapter 17 U.S. Army Intelligence Connection with Satanic Church • 367
368 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
Chapter 17 U.S. Army Intelligence Connection with Satanic Church • 369
370 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
Chapter 17 U.S. Army Intelligence Connection with Satanic Church • 371
372 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
Chapter 17 U.S. Army Intelligence Connection with Satanic Church • 373
374 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
Chapter l7 U.S. Army Intelligence Connection with Satanic Church • 375
376 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
Chapter 17 U.S. Army Intelligence Connection with Satanic Church • 377
378 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
Chapter 17 U.S. Army Intelligence Connection with Satanic Church • 379
380 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper


Appendix A William Cooper's Military Service Record

APPENDIX A: WILLIAM COOPER'S MILITARY SERVICE RECORD
382 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
APPENDIX A William Cooper's Military Service Record • 383
384 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
APPENDIX A William Cooper's Military Service Record • 385
386 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
APPENDIX A William Cooper's Military Service Record • 387
388 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
APPENDIX A William Cooper's Military Service Record • 389
390 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
APPENDIX A William Cooper's Military Service Record • 391
392 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
APPENDIX A William Cooper's Military Service Record • 393
394 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
APPENDIX A William Cooper's Military Service Record • 395
396 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper



Appendix B UFOs and Area 51

APPENDIX B: UFOs AND AREA 51
398 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
APPENDIX B UFOs and Area 51 • 399
400 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
APPENDIX B UFOs and Area 51 • 401
402 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
APPENDIX B UFOs and Area 51 • 403
404 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
APPENDIX B UFOs and Area 51 • 405
406 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
APPENDIX B UFOs and Area 51 • 407
408 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
APPENDIX B UFOs and Area 51 • 409
410 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
APPENDIX B UFOs and Area 51 • 411
412 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
APPENDIX B UFOs and Area 51 • 413
414 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
APPENDIX B UFOs and Area 51 • 415
Two-part message from Joint Staff, Washington, D.C,
to Joint Chiefs of Staff/Defense Intelligence Agency, Washington, D.C.
Subject: Belgium UFO Sightings.
416 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
APPENDIX B UFOs and Area 51 • 417
418 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
APPENDIX B UFOs and Area 51 • 419
420 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
APPENDIX B UFOs and Area 51 421
422 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
APPENDIX B UFOs and Area 51 • 423
424 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
APPENDIX B UFOs and Area 51 • 425
426 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
APPENDIX B UFOs and Area 51 427
428 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William 
Cooper
APPENDIX B UFOs and Area 51 • 429
430 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
APPENDIX B UFOs and Area 51 • 431
432 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
APPENDIX B UFOs and Area 51 • 433
434 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
APPENDIX B UFOs and Area 51 • 435
436 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William 
Cooper
APPENDIX B UFOs and Area 51 • 437
438 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
APPENDIX B UFOs and Area 51 • 439
440 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
APPENDIX B UFOs and Area 51 • 441



Appendix C Alien Implants

APPENDIX C: ALIEN IMPLANTS
APPENDIX C Alien Implants • 443
444 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper



Appendix D AIDS

APPENDIX D: AIDS
446 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
APPENDIX D AIDS • 447



Appendix E New World Order

APPENDIX E: NEW WORLD ORDER
APPENDIX E New World Order • 449
Club of Rome Report
REGIONALIZED AND ADAPTIVE MODEL 
OF THE GLOBAL WORLD SYSTEM 
Report on the Progress in the 
STRATEGY FOR SURVIVAL PROJECT 
of the 
Club of Rome 
Mihajlo Mesarovic and Eduard Pestel, Directors 
CONFIDENTIAL 
September 17, 1973 
450 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
1. Motivation and Objectives 
The world problematique formulated by the CLUB OF ROME is not only global in 
nature, involving factors traditionally considered as unrelated, but also points to the 
crisis situations which are developing in spite of the noblest of intentions and, indeed, 
as their corollary. To point out the problematique and the spectrum of critical and 
traumatic situations it entails is not enough; the acceptance of the reality of the 
problematique MUST BE FOLLOWED BY CHANGES IF THE CONCERN IS NOT 
TO REMAIN PURELY ACADEMIC. It is necessary, therefore, to present the issues 
within the problematique in specific and relevant terms which requires regions 
interpretation of the global issues. Furthermore, a basis should be provided for the 
resolution of conflicts (inevitably accompanying the problematique-type situations) 
through cooperation rather than confrontation. These factors have provided the 
motivation for initiation of the Strategy for Survival project which calls for the 
construction of a regionalized and adaptive model of the total world system with tht 
following specific objectives: 
(1) TO ENABLE THE IMPLEMENTATION OF SCENARIOS FOR THE 
FUTURE DEVELOPMENT OF THE WORLD SYSTEM which represent visions of 
the world future stemming from different cultures and value systems and reflecting 
hopes and fears in different regions of the world. 
(ii) To develop a planning and options-assessment tool for long-range issues, and 
thereby TO PROVIDE A BASIS FOR CONFLICT RESOLUTION by cooperation 
rather than confrontation. 
2. Basic Structure of the Model 
The basic characteristics of the model are: 
(i) THE WORLD SYSTEM IS REPRESENTED in terms of interacting regions with 
provisions made to investigate any individual country or subregion in the context of 
regional and global development. Presently the world system is represented BY TEN 
REGIONS: NORTH AMERICA, WESTERN EUROPE, EASTERN EUROPE, 
JAPAN, REST OF DEVELOPED WORLD, LATIN AMERICA, MIDDLE EAST, 
REST OF AFRICA, SOUTH AND SOUTH EAST ASIA, AND CHINA. 
(ii) In order to be able to deal with the complex of factors involved in problematique 
in a way which is sound, credible and systematic, a hierarchical structure has bee 
adopted for the model in which each level in the hierarchy represents the evolution of 
the world system within a context defined by a given set of laws and principles. 
Specifically, the levels involved are: 
GEO-PHYSICAL, ECOLOGICAL, TECHNOLOGICAL (MAN-MADE ENERGY 
AND MASS TRANSFERS), ECONOMIC, INSTITUTIONAL, SOCIOPOLITICAL, VALUE-CULTURAL AND HUMAN-BIOLOGICAL. Such and 
approach enables an optimal use of confirmed scientific knowledge and available data, 
(iii) An adequate view of the conditions in which the problematique is emerging and 
under which the solutions must be found require the recognition of the purposive 
aspects of the human community and adaptiveness of human beings. The model of the 
world system will have, therefore, two parts: 
(1) the so-called causal part, representing dynamical processes which follow histoical 
patterns of development and (2) the so-called goal-seeking part which represents 
purposive changes under new conditions. The goal-seeking part in turn includes two 
APPENDIX E New World Order • 451 
levels: the decision-making or actions level and the norms level; the former represents 
the purposive response of the system while the latter represents the values and norms 
which constrain and condition such a response. 
3. Progress in the Model Construction 
The construction of the model as described in Sec. 2 and with the objectives as 
specified in Sec. 1 is certainly a rather complex task and the research is organized to 
proceed in parallel in several directions. The overall assessment of the model status is 
the following: 
The model has been developed up to the stage where it can be used for policy analysis 
related to a number of critical issues, such as: energy resources utilization and 
technology assessment; food demand and production; population growth and the 
affect of timing of birth control programs; reduction of inequities in regional economic 
developments; depletion dynamics of certain resources, particularly oil reserves; 
phosphorus use as fertilizer; regional unemployment; constraints on growth due to 
labor, energy or export limitation, etc. 
Specific developments which enable use of the model as described above include the 
following: 
1. A COMPUTER MODEL OF THE WORLD ECONOMIC SYSTEM HAS 
BEEN DEVELOPED AND VALIDATED BY AN EXTENSIVE SET OF DATA. The 
model has two levels - macro and micro. On the MACRO LEVEL the model of each 
region INCLUDES THE GROSS REGIONAL PRODUCT, TOTAL IMPORTS AND 
EXPORTS, CAPITAL AND LABOR PRODUCTIVITY AND VARIOUS 
COMPONENTS OF FINAL DEMAND SUCH AS PUBLIC CONSUMPTION, 
GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURE, AND TOTAL INVESTMENT. ON THE 
MICRO LEVEL EIGHT PRODUCTION SECTORS ARE RECOGNIZED: 
AGRICULTURE MANUFACTURING, FOOD PROCESSING, ENERGY, 
MINING, SERVICES, BANKING AND TRADE, AND RESIDENTIAL 
CONSTRUCTION. The input-output framework is used for the intermediate 
demands. A FULL SCALE MICRO TRADE MATRIX ALSO HAS BEEN 
DEVELOPED. 
2. A WORLD POPULATION MODEL HAS BEEN CONSTRUCTED IN TERMS 
OF THE SAME REGIONS AS THE ECONOMIC MODEL. The model has been 
validited by the data available. In each region the population structure is represented in 
terms of four age groups with appropriate delays which make possible assessment of 
population momentum and assessment of the effectiveness of implementation of 
various population control measures. 
3. AN ENERGY MODEL HAS BEEN CONSTRUCTED which gives for each 
region the consumption and production of energy and interregional exchange of energy 
resources as a function of economic factors. Energy is treated both in composite terms 
and in reference to individual energy sources, namely solid fuel, liquid fuel, nuclear, 
gas and hydro. 
4. A FOOD PRODUCTION AND ARABLE LAND USE MODEL HAS BEEN 
CONSTRUCTED which allows the assessment of a number of food related issues 
including: the need and availability of phosphorus required for intensive agriculture, 
AND THE CONSEQUENCES OF TIMING AND MAGNITUDES OF NATURAL 
DISASTERS SUCH AS DROUGHT, CROP FAILURE DUE TO DISEASE, ETC. 
452 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper 
5. A MAJOR CONCERN IN THE APPLICATION OF THE COMPUTER 
MODEL is its proper utilization so as to avoid dependence on the deterministic aspects 
of model operation. In order to avoid this an interactive method of computer 
simulation analysis has been developed. THE METHOD REPRESENTS A 
SYMBIOSIS OF MAN AND COMPUTER IN WHICH THE COMPUTER 
PROVIDES THE LOGICAL AND NUMERICAL CAPABILITY WHILE MAN 
PROVIDES THE VALUES, INTUITION AND EXPERIENCE. The method utilizes 
an option specification and selection program which enables the policy analyst or 
decision-maker to evaluate alternative options on various levels of the decision process, 
i.e., with respect to goals, strategies, tactical and implementational factors. SPECIAL 
ATTENTION IS PAID TO THE NORM CHANGING PROCESSES. 
4. Progress in Application 
THE MODEL HAS BEEN USED both for the assessment of alternative scenarios 
for future regional and global developments (under different regional conditions) as 
well as in the interactive mode selection of policy options (specifically for the energy 
crises issues in developed regions). 
OUR EFFORTS IN THE IMMEDIATE FUTURE WILL BE CONCENTRATED 
ON FURTHER USE OF THE ALREADY DEVELOPED MODEL. THE PLANS 
INCLUDE EMPHASIS IN THE FOLLOWING THREE DIRECTIONS: 
(i) Assessment in the changes over time of the span of options available to solve some 
major crisis problems. 
(ii) IMPLEMENTATION of the regional models in different parts of the world and 
their connection via a satellite communication network for the purpose of joint 
assessment of the long term global future by teams from the various regions. 
(iii) Implementation of the vision for the future outlined by leaders from an 
underdeveloped region in order TO ASSESS with the model EXISTING OBSTACLES 
AND THE MEANS WHEREBY THE VISION MIGHT BECOME REALITY. 
APPENDIX E New World Order • 453
'KINGDOMS' : CLUB OF ROME'S TEN GLOBAL GROUPS
GROUP 1: North America 
Canada United States of America 
GROUP 2: Western Europe 
Andorra Luxembourg 
Austria Malta 
Belgium Monaco 
Denmark Netherlands 
Federal Republic of Germany Norway 
Finland Portugal 
France San Marino 
Great Britain Spain 
Greece Sweden 
Iceland Switzerland 
Ireland Turkey 
Italy Yugoslavia 
Liechtenstein 
GROUP 3: Japan 
GROUP 4: Rest of the Developed Market Economies 
Australia Oceania 
Israel South Africa 
New Zealand Tasmania 
GROUP 5: Eastern Europe 
Albania Hungary 
Bulgaria Poland 
Czechoslovakia Rumania 
German Democratic Republic Soviet Union 
454 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper 
GROUP 6: Latin America 
Argentina Guyana 
Barbados Haiti 
Bolivia Honduras 
Brazil Jamaica 
British Honduras Mexico 
Chile Nicaragua 
Colombia Panama 
Costa Rica Paraguay 
Cuba Peru 
Dominican Republic Surinam 
Ecuador Trinidad and Tobago 
El Salvador Uruguay 
French Guiana Venezuela 
Guatemala 
GROUP 7: North Africa and the Middle East 
Adu Dhabi Lebanon 
Aden Libya 
Algeria Masqat-Oman 
Bahrain Morocco 
Cyprus Qatar 
Dubai Saudi-Arabia 
Egypt Syria 
Iran Trucial Oman 
Iraq Tunisia 
Jordan Yemen 
Kuwait 
GROUP 8: Main Africa 
Angola Ghana 
Burundi Guinea 
Cabinda Ivory Coast 
Cameroon Kenya 
Central African Republic Liberia 
Chad Malagasy Republic 
Dahomey Malawi 
Ethiopia Mali 
French Somali Coast Mauritania 
Gabon Mauritius 
Gambia Mozambique 
APPENDIX E New World Order • 455
Niger South West Africa 
Nigeria Spanish Guinea 
Portuguese Guinea Spanish Sahara 
Republic of Congo Sudan 
Reunion Tanzania 
Rhodesia Togo 
Rwanda Uganda 
Senegal Upper Volta 
Sierra Leone Zaire 
Somalia Zambia 
South Africa 
GROUP 9: South and Southeast Asia 
Afghanistan Malaysia 
Bangladesh Nepal 
Burma Pakistan 
Cambodia Philippines 
Ceylon South Korea 
India South Vietnam 
Indonesia Taiwan 
LAOS Thailand 
GROUP 10: Centrally Planned Asia 
Mongolia North Vietnam 
North Korea People's Republic of China 
456 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
APPENDIX E New World Order • 457
458 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
APPENDIX E New World Order • 459
460 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
APPENDIX E New World Order • 461
462 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
APPENDIX E New World Order • 463
1 -Rosen 
1 -Liaison 
1 - Nasca
Date: November 29,1963
To: Director
Bureau of Intelligence and Research 
Department of State
From: John Edgar Hoover, Director
Subject: ASSASSINATION OF PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY 
NOVEMBER 22,1963
Our Miami, Florida, Office on November 23,1963, advised 
that the Office of Coordinator of Cuban Affairs in Miami advised that the 
Department of State feels some misguided anti-Castro group might capitalize on the present situation and undertake an unauthorized raid 
against Cuba, believing that the assassination of President John F. Kennedy might herald a change in U. S. policy, which is not true.
Our sources and informants familiar with Cuban matters 
in the Miami area advise that the general feeling in the anti-Castro Cuban 
community is one of stunned disbelief and, even among those who did 
not entirely agree with the President's policy concerning Cuba, the feeling is that the President's death represents a great loss not only to the 
U.S. but to all of Latin America. These sources know of no plans for unauthorized action against Cuba.
An informant who has furnished reliable information in the 
past and who is close to a small pro-Castro group in Miami has advised 
that these individuals are afraid that the assassination of the President 
may result in strong repressive measures being taken against them and, 
although pro-Castro in their feelings, regret the assassination.
The substance of the foregoing information was orally 
furnished to Mr. George Bush of the Central Intelligence Agency and Captain William Edwards of the Defense Intelligence Agency on November 
23,1963, by Mr. W. T. Forsyth of this Bureau.
1 - Director of Naval Intelligence
VHN:gci (12)
464 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
APPENDIX E New World Order • 465
The Report from Iron Mountain
62 THE REPORT
though not yet expressly put forth, is the development of 
a long-range sequence of space-research projects with 
largely unattainable goals. This kind of program offers 
several advantages lacking in the social welfare model. 
First, it is unlikely to phase itself out, regardless of the 
predictable "surprises" science has in store for us: the 
universe is too big. In the event some individual project 
unexpectedly succeeds there would be no dearth of substitute problems. For example, if colonization of the 
moon proceeds on schedule, it could then become "necessary" to establish a beachhead on Mars or Jupiter, and so 
on. Second, it need be no more dependent on the general 
supply-demand economy than its military prototype. 
Third, it lends itself extraordinarily well to arbitrary 
control.
Space research can be viewed as the nearest modern 
equivalent yet devised to the pyramid-building, and 
similar ritualistic enterprises, of ancient societies. It is 
true that the scientific value of the space program, even 
of what has already been accomplished, is substantial on 
its own terms. But current programs are absurdly and 
obviously disproportionate, in the relationship of the 
knowledge sought to the expenditures committed. All 
but a small fraction of the space budget, measured by 
the standards of comparable scientific objectives, must 
be charged de facto to the military economy. Future 
space research, projected as a war surrogate, would 
further reduce the "scientific" rationale of its budget to 
a minuscule percentage indeed. As a purely economic
466 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
SUBSTITUTES FOR THE FUNCTIONS OF WAR 63
substitute for war, therefore, extension of the space program warrants serious consideration.
In Section 3 we pointed out that certain disarmament 
models, which we called conservative, postulated extremely expensive and elaborate inspection systems. 
Would it be possible to extend and institutionalize such 
systems to the point where they might serve as economic 
surrogates for war spending? The organization of failsafe inspection machinery could well be ritualized in a 
manner similar to that of established military processes. 
"Inspection teams" might be very like armies, and their 
technical equipment might be very like weapons. Inflating the inspection budget to military scale presents 
no difficulty. The appeal of this kind of scheme lies in 
the comparative ease of transition between two parallel 
systems.
The "elaborate inspection" surrogate is fundamentally 
fallacious, however. Although it might be economically 
useful, as well as politically necessary, during the disarmament transition, it would fail as a substitute for the 
economic function of war for one simple reason. Peacekeeping inspection is part of a war system, not of a 
peace system. It implies the possibility of weapons maintenance or manufacture, which could not exist in a world 
at peace as here defined. Massive inspection also implies 
sanctions, and thus war-readiness.
The same fallacy is more obvious in plans to create 
a patently useless "defense conversion" apparatus. The 
long-discredited proposal to build "total" civil defense
APPENDIX E New World Order • 467
66 THE REPORT
obvious destabilizing effect of any global social welfare 
surrogate on politically necessary class relationships 
would create an entirely new set of transition problems 
at least equal in magnitude.
Credibility, in fact, lies at the heart of the problem 
of developing a political substitute for war. This is where 
the space-race proposals, in many ways so well suited as 
economic substitutes for war, fall short. The most ambitious and unrealistic space project cannot of itself generate a believable external menace. It has been hotly 
argued6
 that such a menace would offer the 'last, best 
hope of peace," etc., by uniting mankind against the 
danger of destruction by "creatures" from other planets 
or from outer space. Experiments have been proposed to 
test the credibility of an out-of-our-world invasion threat; 
it is possible that a few of the more difficult-to-explain 
"flying saucer" incidents of recent years were in fact 
early experiments of this kind. If so, they could hardly 
have been judged encouraging. We anticipate no difficulties in making a "need" for a giant super space program credible for economic purposes, even were there 
not ample precedent; extending it, for political purposes, 
to include features unfortunately associated with science 
fiction would obviously be a more dubious undertaking.
Nevertheless, an effective political substitute for war 
would require "alternate enemies," some of which might 
seem equally farfetched in the context of the current 
war system. It may be, for instance, that gross pollution 
of the environment can eventually replace the possibility 
of mass destruction by nuclear weapons as the principal
468 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
SUBSTITUTES FOR THE FUNCTIONS OF WAR 67
apparent threat to the survival of the species. Poisoning 
of the air, and of the principal sources of food and water 
supply, is already well advanced, and at first glance 
would seem promising in this respect; it constitutes a 
threat that can be dealt with only through social organization and political power. But from present indications 
it will be a generation to a generation and a half before 
environmental pollution, however severe, will be sufficiently menacing, on a global scale, to offer a possible 
basis for a solution.
It is true that the rate of pollution could be increased 
selectively for this purpose; in fact, the mere modifying 
of existing programs for the deterrence of pollution could 
speed up the process enough to make the threat credible 
much sooner. But the pollution problem has been so 
widely publicized in recent years that it seems highly 
improbable that a program of deliberate environmental 
poisoning could be implemented in a politically acceptable manner.
However unlikely some of the possible alternate enemies we have mentioned may seem, we must emphasize 
that one must be found, of credible quality and magnitude, if a transition to peace is ever to come about without social disintegration. It is more probable, in our 
judgment, that such a threat will have to be invented, 
rather than developed from unknown conditions. For 
this reason, we believe further speculation about its putative nature ill-advised in this context. Since there is 
considerable doubt, in our minds, that any viable political surrogate can be devised, we are reluctant to com-
APPENDIX E New World Order • 469
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace
DIVISION OF INTERCOURSE AND EDUCATION 
Foreword by Elihu Root 
Publication No. 15
104 THE IMPERIAL JAPANESE MISSION
of the United States as to Central and South America and the enunciation 
of Japan's attitude toward China. In the first there is on the part of the 
United States no engagement or promise, while in the other Japan voluntarily announces that Japan will herself engage not to violate the political 
or territorial integrity of her neighbor, and to observe the principle of the 
open door and equal opportunity, asking at the same time other nations to 
respect these principles.
Therefore, gentlemen, you will mark the wide difference and agree with 
me, I am sure, that the use of the term is somewhat loose and misleading. 
I ask you to note this with no suggestion that I can or any one else does 
question the policy or attitude of your country, which we well know will 
always deal fairly and honorably with other nations.
As you must have noticed, I have persistently struck one note every 
time I have spoken. It has been the note of warning against German intrigue in America and in Japan—intrigue which has extended over a period 
of more than ten years. I am not going to weary you with a repetition of 
this squalid story of plots, conceived and fostered by the agents of Germany, 
but I solemnly repeat the warning here in this most distinguished gathering, 
so thoroughly representative of the highest ideals of American journalism.
In my speeches at various places I have endeavored to speak frankly 
on all points at issue or of interest at this time. There are, of course, some 
things which can not be openly discussed, because of a wise embargo upon 
unwise disclosures, but I am confident that from this time forward we will 
be able to effectively cooperate in all matters tending to secure a victory 
in this struggle which means so much for all of us, and that throughout all 
the years to come, differences of opinion or difficulties arising between our 
two countries will be settled, as all such questions and difficulties can be 
settled, between close friends and partners.
I thank you, sir, for your hospitality and for your courtesy. I assure 
you, gentlemen, again that we appreciate more than I can express the high 
consideration, the patriotism, and the broad and friendly spirit with which 
you have treated this Mission from Japan.
Comptroller William A. Prendergast was next called upon. He said in 
part:
Mr. Chairman, Viscount Ishii, gentlemen of the Commission, Your 
Excellency, and gentlemen: Our host has asked me to say a word of welcome to Viscount Ishii and associate members of the Commission in the 
name of the great city of New York.
It would seem to me that it is hardly necessary even to attempt to 
repeat the very great pleasure and honor and happiness that it gives New 
York to have you as its guests.
Now, Viscount Ishii, might I at this time sound a note which may be 
somewhat contrary to that which has been the dominant idea of our discussions upon these occasions? We have treated, and naturally, of war. 
That is the thought that is uppermost in our minds. It is the thing that is 
in the thought tad the mind of man, woman, and child—war. I can say
470 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
APPENDIX E New World Order . 471
472 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper



Appendix F U.S. Government Drug Involvement

APPENDIX F: U.S. GOVERNMENT DRUG INVOLVEMENT
474 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
APPENDIX F U.S. Government Drug Involvement • 475
476 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
APPENDIX F U.S. Government Drug Involvement • 477
478 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
APPENDIX F U.S. Government Drug Involvement • 479
• BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
APPENDIX F U.S. Government Drag Involvement • 481
 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
APPENDIX F U.S. Government Drug Involvement • 483
484 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
APPENDIX F U.S. Government Drug Involvement • 485
486 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
APPENDIX F U.S. Government Drug Involvement • 487
488 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
APPENDIX F U.S. Government Drug Involvement • 489



Appendix G Kurzweil vs. Hopkins

APPENDIX G: KURZWEIL VS. HOPKINS
APPENDIX G Kurzweil vs. Hopkins • 491
492 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
APPENDIX G Kurzweil vs. Hopkins • 493
494 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
APPENDIX G Kurzweil vs. Hopkins • 495
496 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
APPENDIX G Kurzweil vs. Hopkins • 497
198 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper
APPENDIX G Kurzweil vs. Hopkins • 
499
500 • BEHOLD A PALE HORSE William Cooper