破碎的中国梦：改革如何重生极权主义
　1 The Decisive Decade
　2 Reform and Growth in the 1980s
　3 Building Neo-Authoritarianism, 1992-2002
　4 Stagnation in the Hu Jintao Era
　5 China's Economic Miracle
　6 Revival of Totalitarianism Under Xi Jinping
　7 End of the Chinese Economic Miracle
　8 From Engagement to a New Cold War
　Conclusion
　ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
　NOTES
　INDEX







ÁÁÁÁÁÁÁÁÁÁ：doosho.com　1，2，3，4，5

ББББББББББ：doosho.com　1，2，3，4，5

ĆĆĆĆĆĆĆĆĆĆ：doosho.com　

ĎĎĎĎĎĎĎĎĎĎ：doosho.com　

ÊÊÊÊÊÊÊÊÊÊ：doosho.com　

♀♀♀♀♀♀♀♀♀♀：doosho.com　

ĞĞĞĞĞĞĞĞĞĞ：doosho.com　

ĤĤĤĤĤĤĤĤĤĤ：doosho.com　

ĨĨĨĨĨĨĨĨĨĨ：doosho.com　

ĴĴĴĴĴĴĴĴĴĴ：doosho.com　

ЌЌЌЌЌЌЌЌЌЌ：doosho.com　

ĹĹĹĹĹĹĹĹĹĹ：doosho.com　

♂♂♂♂♂♂♂♂♂♂：doosho.com　

ŃŃŃŃŃŃŃŃŃŃ：doosho.com　

ÓÓÓÓÓÓÓÓÓÓ：doosho.com　

φφφφφφφφφφ：doosho.com　

ℚℚℚℚℚℚℚℚℚℚ：doosho.com　

ŔŔŔŔŔŔŔŔŔŔ：doosho.com　

ŚŚŚŚŚŚŚŚŚŚ：doosho.com　

ŤŤŤŤŤŤŤŤŤŤ：doosho.com　

ÚÚÚÚÚÚÚÚÚÚ：doosho.com　

≚≚≚≚≚≚≚≚≚≚：doosho.com　

ŴŴŴŴŴŴŴŴŴŴ：doosho.com　

ϰϰϰϰϰϰϰϰϰϰ：doosho.com　

ÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÝÝ：doosho.com　

ŹŹŹŹŹŹŹŹŹŹ：doosho.com　








破碎的中国梦：改革如何重生极权主义




《破碎的中国梦_改革如何重生极权主义》The Broken China Dream

Copyright © 2026 by Princeton University Press

版权所有 © 2026 普林斯顿大学出版社

Princeton University Press is committed to the protection of copyright and the intellectual property our authors entrust to us. Copyright promotes the progress and integrity of knowledge created by humans. Thank you for supporting free speech and the global exchange of ideas by purchasing an authorized edition of this book. If you wish to reproduce or distribute any part of it in any form, please obtain permission.

普林斯顿大学出版社致力于保护作者委托给我们的版权和知识产权。版权促进人类创造的知识的进步和完整性。感谢您购买本书正版，支持言论自由和全球思想交流。如果您希望以任何形式复制或传播本书的任何部分，请事先获得许可。

Requests for permission to reproduce material from this work should be sent to permissions@press.princeton.edu

如需转载本文内容，请发送邮件至 permissions@press.princeton.edu 申请许可。

Published by Princeton University Press

由普林斯顿大学出版社出版

41 William Street, Princeton, New Jersey 08540

新泽西州普林斯顿威廉街41号，邮编08540

99 Banbury Road, Oxford OX2 6JX

牛津班伯里路99号，邮编OX2 6JX

press.princeton.edu

press.princeton.edu

GPSR Authorized Representative: Easy Access System Europe - Mustamäe tee 50, 10621 Tallinn, Estonia, gpsr.request@easproject.com

GPSR授权代表：Easy Access System Europe - Mustamäe tee 50, 10621 Tallinn, Estonia, gpsr.request@easproject.com

All Rights Reserved

版权所有

ISBN 9780691223339

ISBN 9780691223339

ISBN (e-book) 9780691223346

ISBN（电子书）9780691223346

British Library Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available

英国图书馆出版物编目数据可供查阅。

Editorial: Bridget Flannery-McCoy, Dave McBride, and Alena Chekanov

编辑：布里奇特·弗兰纳里-麦考伊、戴夫·麦克布莱德和阿莱娜·切卡诺夫

Production Editorial: Ali Parrington

制作编辑：阿里·帕林顿

Jacket Design: Ben Higgins

夹克设计：本·希金斯

Production: Erin Suydam

制作：艾琳·苏伊丹

Publicity: James Schneider and Kathryn Stevens

宣传：詹姆斯·施耐德和凯瑟琳·史蒂文斯

Copyeditor: Anita O'Brien

文字编辑：安妮塔·奥布莱恩

This book has been composed in Arno

本书以阿尔诺语写成

Printed in the United States of America

美国印刷

10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1





ABBREVIATIONS





缩写


A2/AD

A2/AD anti-access/area denial

反访问/区域拒止

ADIZ

亚的斯亚贝巴 Air Defense Identification Zone

防空识别区

AIG

美国国际集团 American International Group

美国国际集团

BOT

机器人 build-operate-transfer (model)

建设-运营-移交（模式）

BRI

一带一路 Belt and Road Initiative

“一带一路”倡议

BRICS

金砖国家 Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa

巴西、俄罗斯、印度、中国和南非

CCP

中共 Chinese Communist Party

中共

CCTV

闭路电视监控 China Central Television

中国中央电视台

CDIC

CDIC Central Discipline Inspection Commission

中央纪律检查委员会

CMC

羧甲基纤维素 Central Military Commission

中央军事委员会

CNKI

CNKI China National Knowledge Infrastructure

中国国家知网

CYL

气缸 Communist Youth League

共青团

DPP

民进党 Democratic Progressive Party

民进党

EPZ

出口加工区 export processing zone

出口加工区

EU

欧盟 European Union

欧洲联盟

FAO

联合国粮农组织 Food and Agriculture Organization

联合国粮食及农业组织

FDI

外国直接投资 foreign direct investment

外国直接投资

FTO

FTO foreign trade organization

对外贸易组织

GATT

关贸总协定 General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade

关税及贸易总协定

GFC

全球金融危机 global financial crisis

全球金融危机

HDI

人类发展指数 Human Development Index

人类发展指数

ICF

ICF China Integrated Circuit Industry Investment Fund

中国集成电路产业投资基金

ICOR

国际冠状病毒 incremental capital output ratio

增量资本产出比

ILO

国际劳工组织 International Labour Organization

国际劳工组织

IMF

国际货币基金组织 International Monetary Fund

国际货币基金组织

IPO

首次公开募股 initial public offering

首次公开募股

KMT

国民党 Nationalists (Kuomintang)

国民党

LGFV

LGFV local government financing vehicle

地方政府融资工具

MFN

最惠国待遇 most-favored nation

最惠国

MOFERT

莫弗特 Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations and Trade

对外经济关系和贸易部

MPS

移动电源 Ministry of Public Security

公安部

Mss

女士 Ministry of State Security

国家安全部

NCW

NCW new cold war

新冷战

NPC

NPC National People's Congress

人大

ODA

ODA Official Development Assistance

官方发展援助

PAP

肺动脉 People's Armed Police

人民武警

PAP

肺动脉 People's Action Party (Singapore)

人民行动党（新加坡）

PBOC

中国人民银行 People's Bank of China

中国人民银行

PLA

聚乳酸 People's Liberation Army

人民解放军

PPP

公私合营 purchasing power parity

购买力平价

PRC

中华人民共和国 People's Republic of China

中华人民共和国

PRI

在 Institutional Revolutionary Party (Mexico)

墨西哥革命制度党

PSC

原发性硬化症 Politburo Standing Committee

政治局常务委员会

ROC

鹏 Republic of China

中华民国

SAIC

上汽集团 State Administration for Industry and Commerce

国家工商行政管理总局

SARS

SARS Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome

严重急性呼吸综合征

SASAC

SASAC State Asset Supervision and Administration Commission

国家资产监督管理委员会

SCO

SCO Shanghai Cooperation Organisation

上海合作组织

SED

单一电子数据 Strategic Economic Dialogue

战略经济对话

SEZ

经济特区 special economic zone

特殊经济区

soE

soE state-owned enterprise

国有企业

SPP

SPP Supreme People's Procuratorate

最高人民检察院

TFP

全要素生产率 total factor productivity

全要素生产率

TPP

跨太平洋伙伴关系协定 Trans-Pacific Partnership

跨太平洋伙伴关系

TVE

TVE township and village enterprises

乡镇企业

UNDP

联合国开发计划署 United Nations Development Programme

联合国开发计划署

UNHCR

联合国难民署 United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

联合国难民事务高级专员

UNICEF

联合国儿童基金会 United Nations Children's Fund

联合国儿童基金会

WEP

WEP World Education Program

世界教育计划

WTO

世贸组织 World Trade Organization

世贸组织

ZGTJNJ

ZGTJNJ China Statistical Yearbook

中国统计年鉴





Introduction





介绍


THE CLOSING ceremony of the 20th National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) on October 22, 2022, was supposed to be a festive occasion celebrating Xi Jinping's unprecedented third term as the party's general secretary. But something evidently went awry. Xi's predecessor, former party chief Hu Jintao, then 80 years old, was escorted off the podium, apparently against his will. The more than 2,300 delegates to the congress stared in stunned disbelief while Xi and the other top party leaders seated with Hu sat expressionless, pretending not to notice what was widely seen as an act of public humiliation of a former party chief.

2022年10月22日，中共二十大闭幕式本应是一场庆祝习近平史无前例地第三次担任中共中央总书记的盛会。然而，显然出了岔子。习近平的前任、时年80岁的前中共中央总书记胡锦涛被护送下台，显然是违背了他本人的意愿。与会的2300多名代表目瞪口呆，难以置信地看着这一幕，而习近平和其他与胡锦涛同席的高层领导人则面无表情地坐在那里，假装没注意到这一被广泛视为对一位前党魁的公开羞辱。

What exactly happened remains a subject of fevered speculation. The most plausible explanation is that Hu noticed in the file given to him that his protégé and two-term member of the Politburo, Hu Chunhua (no relation), was not on the list of members to be appointed to the new Politburo, even though he was only 59 years old and had more experience than most other members of the Politburo. As Hu Jintao likely had not been notified of this last-minute change, he probably wanted to ask those seated around him (Xi Jinping sat to his right) why Hu Chunhua had been dropped from the Politburo. Apparently, this was too much for one of Xi's closest loyalists, Li Zhanshu, a retiring member of the Politburo Standing Committee. Li seized the file from Hu Jintao while Xi summoned an aide and appeared to instruct him to remove Hu from the podium.1

究竟发生了什么，至今仍是众说纷纭。最合理的解释是，胡锦涛在收到的文件中发现，他的门生、曾两度担任政治局委员的胡春华（与胡锦涛并无亲属关系）不在新一届政治局委员的名单上。尽管胡春华当时只有59岁，而且比大多数政治局委员都更有经验。由于胡锦涛很可能事先没有收到这一变动的通知，他或许想问问周围的人（习近平坐在他右边），为什么胡春华被排除在政治局之外。显然，这件事让习近平最亲近的拥护者之一、即将卸任的政治局常委栗战书非常不满。栗战书从胡锦涛手中夺过文件，而习近平则叫来一名助手，似乎指示他将胡锦涛请下讲台。

This incident, unanticipated by Xi as it may have been, nevertheless serves as a fitting marker of the total political dominance he had attained since becoming CCP chief in November 2012. During his decade in power, he had dismantled the political order constructed by his predecessors and had revived the central elements of totalitarianism: personalistic rule, a cult of personality, permanent purges, stifling social control, ideological indoctrination, and an aggressive foreign policy. The reinstitution of fear as a vital instrument of rule can be seen in a long list of acts previously thought to be inconceivable in the post-Mao era: the mass incarceration of millions of members of ethnic minorities (mostly Uighurs) in Xinjiang in the second half of the 2010s; the unilateral imposition of a national security law on Hong Kong in July 2020 that all but ended the "one country, two systems" governance model in the former British colony; the ferocious crackdown on civil society, the press, and social media that has raised repression to its worst level in the post-Mao era.

尽管习近平可能对此事件始料未及，但这起事件却恰如其分地标志着自2012年11月就任中共中央总书记以来，他所取得的绝对政治统治地位。在他执政的十年间，他瓦解了前任构建的政治秩序，并复兴了极权主义的核心要素：个人主义统治、个人崇拜、持续不断的清洗、令人窒息的社会控制、意识形态灌输以及咄咄逼人的外交政策。将恐惧重新确立为统治的重要工具，可以从一系列在后毛泽东时代被认为不可思议的行径中看出：例如，在2010年代后半期，对新疆数百万少数民族（主要是维吾尔族）成员进行大规模监禁；以及在2020年7月单方面在香港实施国家安全法，几乎彻底终结了这片前英国殖民地的“一国两制”治理模式。对公民社会、新闻媒体和社交媒体的残酷镇压，使后毛泽东时代镇压程度达到了最严重的水平。

Within the regime, Xi made himself the most powerful—and most feared—Chinese ruler since the death of Mao Zedong in 1976, largely by deploying the tactics of the permanent purge and monopolization of decision-making power favored by totalitarian leaders. By the time he ordered that Hu Jintao be escorted off the podium, Xi had broken nearly all the norms and rules established by the party in the post-Mao era, including collective leadership, term limits, mandatory retirements, and security of political elites. (By late 2022, Xi's decade-long war on corruption had led to the investigation of 4.6 million party members, including more than 500 "centrally supervised" officials and more than 200,000 mid-level and local officials. About one in eight full and candidate members of the Central Committee had been investigated, prosecuted, and imprisoned.)2

在政权内部，习近平凭借其惯用的手段——持续清洗和垄断决策权——成为了自1976年毛泽东去世以来权力最大、也最令人畏惧的中国统治者，而这些手段正是极权主义领导人所推崇的。当他下令将胡锦涛护送下台时，习近平几乎打破了毛泽东时代后党内建立的所有规范和规则，包括集体领导、任期限制、强制退休以及政治精英的安全保障。（到2022年底，习近平长达十年的反腐战争已导致460万名党员受到调查，其中包括500多名“中央监督”官员和20多万名中层及地方官员。大约八分之一的中央委员和候补委员遭到调查、起诉和监禁。）

The day after his display of raw political power in front of the officials who ran the country, the Central Committee duly elected Xi as general secretary for another five-year term, breaking the unwritten two-term limit and effectively making him the first lifelong ruler since Mao Zedong.

在习近平向国家领导人展示其赤裸裸的政治权力后的第二天，中央委员会正式选举习近平为总书记，任期五年，打破了不成文的两届任期限制，实际上使他成为毛泽东以来第一位终身统治者。

The return of a neo-totalitarian ruler and practices reminiscent of Stalinism was scarcely imaginable four decades earlier when survivors of Mao's Cultural Revolution had regrouped in Beijing to salvage a regime traumatized by its self-destructive policies. Prominent among them were Deng Xiaoping, who had the distinction of being purged thrice by the party (twice by Mao), and Chen Yun, another veteran revolutionary and the party's most respected economic planner. Although Deng and Chen would later clash over economic reform, they shared the same goal of restoring collective leadership and preventing the rise of a Mao-like figure who could again terrorize the party. They pushed through a series of reforms enshrining the principle of collective leadership, prohibiting the building of a personality cult, and introducing the practice of mandatory retirement and term limits.

四十年前，当毛泽东文化大革命的幸存者们在北京重整旗鼓，试图挽救一个因自身毁灭性政策而伤痕累累的政权时，新极权统治者的回归以及类似斯大林主义的做法几乎是难以想象的。其中最引人注目的是邓小平，他曾三次被党清洗（其中两次是毛泽东清洗），以及陈云，另一位资深革命家，也是党内最受尊敬的经济规划师。尽管邓小平和陈云后来在经济改革问题上存在分歧，但他们有着共同的目标：恢复集体领导，防止出现一个类似毛泽东的人物再次恐吓党。他们推动了一系列改革，确立了集体领导原则，禁止建立个人崇拜，并引入了强制退休和任期限制制度。

In addition to such efforts to steer the party away from its totalitarian past, the party in the early 1980s also boasted liberal-leaning incumbent leaders running its day-to-day affairs (even though Deng and Chen would still call the ultimate shots). Hu Yaobang became party chief in June 1981 after Deng and Chen forced out Hua Guofeng, a transitional leader credited with the coup that led to the arrest of Mao's widow and three other radicals in early October 1976. Hu Yaobang oversaw the party's routine administration for the next five and half years and played a pivotal role in drafting some of the party's historic documents in the 1980s. On the economic side, Zhao Ziyang, the premier, worked tirelessly to turn Deng's vision of "reform and opening" into a reality. The reformist duo was instrumental in nudging the party in a kinder, gentler direction. Indeed, before Deng ordered the Chinese military to crush the peaceful prodemocracy protests in Beijing on June 4, 1989, China had experienced the most open and free decade in the post-1949 era.

除了努力引导党摆脱其极权主义的过去之外，20世纪80年代初的党内也涌现出一批倾向自由主义的现任领导人，他们负责日常事务（尽管最终的决定权仍然掌握在邓小平和陈水扁手中）。1981年6月，胡耀邦在邓小平和陈水扁迫使过渡时期领导人华国锋下台后，成为党的总书记。华国锋曾策划政变，导致毛泽东遗孀和其他三名激进分子于1976年10月初被捕。在接下来的五年半时间里，胡耀邦负责党的日常管理工作，并在20世纪80年代起草了一些党的历史性文件，发挥了关键作用。在经济方面，总理赵紫阳不遗余力地将邓小平的“改革开放”构想变为现实。这对改革派二人组在推动党走向更加温和、友善的方向方面发挥了重要作用。事实上，在邓小平于 1989 年 6 月 4 日下令中国军队镇压北京的和平民主抗议活动之前，中国经历了 1949 年以来最开放、最自由的十年。

Hopes that China would continue to evolve into a more prosperous and open society did not die even after the brutal suppression of the protesters in Beijing in June 1989. The collapse of the Soviet Union in December 1991 led Deng to launch his final attempt to revive the country's economic revolution in early 1992, as he knew that the CCP, like the former Soviet Union, would also lose legitimacy if it failed to deliver a better standard of living for the Chinese people.

即使在1989年6月北京发生残酷镇压示威活动之后，人们对中国继续发展成为一个更加繁荣开放的社会的希望也没有破灭。1991年12月苏联解体后，邓小平于1992年初发起了他最后一次尝试，试图重振中国的经济革命。因为他知道，如果中国共产党不能像前苏联一样，为中国人民带来更好的生活水平，它也会失去执政的合法性。

During the following two decades, modernization on an unprecedented scale in human history completely transformed China, even though the party retained its power and continued to resist political liberalization. For those believing that growing economic prosperity and integration with the West through trade and investment would increase the odds of bringing democracy to the country, democratization through economic modernization seemed a feasible route for China in the post-Tiananmen era. In the twenty years between Deng's tour of South China in 1992 that reignited the economic reforms and the installation of Xi Jinping as the new party chief in late 2012, the Chinese economy grew at an average of 10 percent each year.3 Per capita income measured in purchasing power rose nearly tenfold, from 1,262 purchasing power parity (PPP) to 11,169 PPP, during the same period.4 In 1992, only 27.5 percent (or 322 million) of the population lived in urban areas. By 2012, 52.6 percent (or 712 million) of the population were urban residents.5 The Chinese population had also become better educated. In 1992, 604,000 people graduated from college. In 2012, 6.24 million people graduated from college, representing a tenfold increase.6 The globalization in the post-Cold War era helped make China an integral part of the global economy and also the world's largest manufacturing power. Between 1992 and 2012, more than $1.2 trillion in foreign direct investment (FDI) flowed into China, and foreign merchandise trade increased from $136 billion to $3.867 trillion.7

在接下来的二十年里，中国经历了人类历史上前所未有的现代化进程，尽管中共仍然掌权并继续抵制政治自由化，但中国却发生了翻天覆地的变化。对于那些认为经济繁荣以及通过贸易和投资与西方融合能够增加中国实现民主化可能性的人来说，通过经济现代化实现民主化似乎是后天安门时代中国可行的道路。从1992年邓小平访问华南重启经济改革到2012年底习近平就任中共中央总书记，这二十年间，中国经济年均增长率达到10%。同期，按购买力平价计算的人均收入增长了近十倍，从1262倍增长到11169倍。1992年，只有27.5%（即3.22亿）的人口居住在城镇地区。到2012年，52.6%（即7.12亿）的人口为城镇居民。中国人口的教育水平也显著提高。1992年，大学毕业生人数为60.4万人；到2012年，这一数字达到624万人，增长了十倍。冷战后的全球化进程使中国成为全球经济的重要组成部分，并跻身世界最大的制造业强国之列。1992年至2012年间，流入中国的外国直接投资（FDI）超过1.2万亿美元，对外商品贸易额从1360亿美元增长至3.867万亿美元。

Before the rise of Xi, few could have imagined that a country that had made such tremendous progress through economic development and globalization could restore totalitarian rule at home and precipitate a new cold war with the West. Tragically, that is exactly what has happened. By the time that Xi effectively became China's new lifetime ruler, he not only had revived totalitarian rule at home but also had implemented an aggressive foreign policy that eventually contributed to the collapse of Sino-American relations and the rise of a new cold war.

在习近平上台之前，几乎没有人能够想象，一个通过经济发展和全球化取得如此巨大进步的国家，竟然会在国内恢复极权统治，并引发与西方的新冷战。然而，悲剧的是，这正是已经发生的事情。当习近平实际上成为中国新的终身领导人时，他不仅在国内恢复了极权统治，还推行了咄咄逼人的外交政策，最终导致了中美关系的破裂和新冷战的爆发。





What Happened?





发生了什么？


No single theory in the existing social science literature can fully explain the revival of totalitarian rule in China despite decades of transformative socioeconomic modernization, the immense improvements in economic wellbeing, and integration with the global economy. To understand how China underwent a great political leap backward under Xi's rule, we must first appreciate the odds against a potential opposite outcome—political liberalization or even democratization in parallel with rapid economic development.

尽管中国经历了数十年的社会经济现代化转型，经济福祉大幅提升，并融入全球经济，但现有的社会科学文献中没有任何单一理论能够完全解释中国极权统治的复兴。要理解中国在习近平统治下为何经历了政治上的巨大倒退，我们首先必须认识到，另一种可能的结果——政治自由化甚至民主化与经济快速发展同步进行——的可能性微乎其微。

One of the greatest puzzles about China since the end of the Maoist era is the apparent disconnect between economic development and democracy. Contrary to the strong correlation between the level of economic development and the existence of democratic regimes that has long been observed, rising prosperity and social change in China since the 1980s have created many favorable preconditions for democracy but have not actually led to meaningful democratization of its political system.8 Explanation of this puzzle may not be difficult to find. For starters, despite the observed correlation between wealth and democracy, the exact mechanisms by which economic development leads to democracy remain unclear.9 Research on democratization since the mid-1970s shows that the choices made by authoritarian ruling elites play a far more important and direct role in the transition from authoritarian rule.10 One of the most influential studies of the relationship between economic development and democracy finds no linear relationship between economic development and the transition to democracy. The single most important variable in a country's transition to democracy is not the attainment of a particular level of wealth but the demise of dictatorship.11

自毛泽东时代结束以来，中国面临的最大谜团之一是经济发展与民主之间明显的脱节。与长期以来人们观察到的经济发展水平与民主政体存在之间的强相关性相反，自20世纪80年代以来，中国经济的繁荣和社会变革虽然为民主创造了许多有利条件，但实际上并未真正实现政治体制的民主化。8 对此谜团的解释或许并不难。首先，尽管财富与民主之间存在相关性，但经济发展如何最终促成民主的具体机制仍不明确。9 自20世纪70年代中期以来的民主化研究表明，威权统治精英的选择在从威权统治向民主过渡的过程中发挥着更为重要和直接的作用。10 一项关于经济发展与民主关系的最具影响力的研究发现，经济发展与向民主过渡之间并不存在线性关系。一个国家向民主转型过程中最重要的因素不是财富达到何种水平，而是独裁统治的终结。

If the strategic choices made by China's leaders in the post-Mao era matter more than the structural changes of the country's society and economy in determining the evolution of its political system, then there may be a simpler and more straightforward explanation of the Chinese puzzle. One-party rule has persisted in China in spite of modernization mainly because the CCP not only has chosen to resist pressures for political liberalization but also has adopted effective measures to neutralize the political effects of economic development. Indeed, we do not need to look far to find evidence that Deng Xiaoping, the leader who almost single-handedly steered the party away from Maoism in the direction of modernization, had no intention of allowing his project of "reform and opening" to endanger the party's political monopoly. In March 1979, three months after he effectively became the paramount leader, Deng laid down the "Four Cardinal Principles"—upholding the socialist path, the people's democratic dictatorship, the CCP leadership, and Mao Zedong Thought and Marxism-Leninism—as the political limits not subject to challenge.12 However hard he pushed for market reforms, integration with the West, and measures favorable to development during his rule, Deng made it abundantly clear that economic modernization was the means by which to perpetuate one-party rule, and nothing else. Although he fought the hardliners in the party who resisted his economic reforms, he consistently took their side, often wittingly, in lashing out against what he called "bourgeois liberalization"—his shorthand for societal pressures to advance political liberalism and democracy.

如果说后毛泽东时代中国领导人的战略选择比国家社会经济的结构性变革更能决定其政治体制的演变，那么或许可以对中国政治的谜题找到一个更简单、更直接的解释。尽管中国经历了现代化进程，但一党专政依然存在，这主要是因为中共不仅抵制了政治自由化的压力，还采取了有效措施来抵消经济发展带来的政治影响。事实上，我们无需费力寻找证据，就能发现邓小平——这位几乎凭借一己之力带领中共摆脱毛泽东思想、走向现代化的领导人——从未想过让他的“改革开放”计划危及党的政治垄断地位。 1979年3月，邓小平实际上成为最高领导人三个月后，提出了“四大基本原则”——坚持社会主义道路、人民民主专政、中共领导、毛泽东思想和马克思列宁主义——作为不容挑战的政治界限。尽管邓小平在其执政期间大力推进市场改革、与西方融合以及有利于发展的措施，但他始终明确表示，经济现代化是维护一党专政的手段，别无其他。虽然他与党内反对经济改革的强硬派作斗争，但在抨击他所谓的“资产阶级自由化”（他用这个词来指代社会上推进政治自由化和民主的压力）时，他始终站在强硬派一边，而且往往是有意为之。

To be sure, there was perhaps a narrow and brief window for democratization in the 1980s, the most open period since 1949. During the decade, liberal reformers such as Hu Yaobang (party chief from 1981 to January 1987) and Zhao Ziyang (premier from 1980 to 1987 and party chief from 1987 to May 1989) did what they could to open up the political system. Taking advantage of Deng's support for administrative reforms to improve the efficiency of the state, in 1986-1987 Zhao even drafted a blueprint that had the potential of introducing a limited form of political pluralism into the Chinese party-state.13 Despite their positions as the top leaders, these two reformers did not have ultimate decision-making authority. Deng Xiaoping and the other aging revolutionary veterans wielded such power and made sure that Hu and Zhao, whose limited mandate was to implement Deng's economic reforms, would not condone liberalizing trends that could endanger one-party rule. Indeed, Deng purged these two reformers when they supported prodemocracy forces in defiance of Deng's expressed hard-line views. As the balance of power in the 1980s consistently favored political hard-liners such as Deng and Chen Yun, the odds for genuine and sustained liberalization were never great.

诚然，20世纪80年代或许是民主化的短暂窗口期，也是自1949年以来最为开放的时期。在这十年间，胡耀邦（1981年至1987年1月任中共中央总书记）和赵紫阳（1980年至1987年任国务院总理，1987年至1989年5月任中共中央总书记）等自由派改革者竭尽所能地开放政治体制。1986年至1987年，赵紫阳利用邓小平对行政改革以提高国家效率的支持，甚至起草了一份蓝图，该蓝图有可能在中国党国体制中引入有限形式的政治多元化。尽管这两位改革者身居要职，但他们并没有最终的决策权。邓小平和其他年迈的革命老将掌握着如此大的权力，确保胡锦涛和赵立坚这两位被赋予有限权力、仅负责执行邓小平经济改革的改革派人士不会容忍任何可能危及一党专政的自由化趋势。事实上，当胡锦涛和赵立坚违背邓小平的强硬路线，支持民主力量时，邓小平就对这两位改革派人士进行了清洗。由于20世纪80年代的权力平衡始终有利于邓小平、陈云等政治强硬派，真正持久的自由化进程从未取得过显著进展。

After the thorough purge of the liberal reformers following the crackdown in June 1989, such odds evaporated. In the post-Tiananmen era, the regime adopted a sophisticated survival strategy that relied on a diverse set of tools to ensure that economic development and globalization would not endanger the party's hold on power.14 The party maintained broad-based popular support mainly by delivering rising prosperity. Regime legitimacy was also reinforced with appeals to nationalism.15 To expand its base, the party carried out a concerted program to recruit capitalists, professionals, and intellectuals—new social elites whose support would help it rule a more diverse and complex society and economy.16 The post-Tiananmen period also saw the rise of a security state equipped with a vast network of informants and advanced technology, underwritten by a massive increase in fiscal resources generated by the economic boom.17 As a result of the party's response, rapid economic development in the post-Tiananmen era strengthened party power instead of weakening it.

1989年6月镇压事件后，自由派改革者遭到彻底清洗，这种可能性不复存在。在后天安门时代，该政权采取了一套复杂的生存战略，依靠多种手段确保经济发展和全球化不会危及党的统治。该党主要通过不断提升经济繁荣来维持广泛的民众支持。政权的合法性也通过诉诸民族主义得到加强。15 为了扩大其基础，党开展了一项协调一致的计划，招募资本家、专业人士和知识分子——这些新的社会精英的支持将有助于其统治一个更加多元化和复杂的社会和经济。16 后天安门时代，一个拥有庞大情报网络和先进技术的安全国家也随之崛起，而经济繁荣带来的财政资源大幅增长为其提供了保障。17 由于党的应对措施，后天安门时代的快速经济发展非但没有削弱党的权力，反而增强了党的权力。

Furthermore, the critical choices made by top CCP leaders in the 1980s, the party's effective adaptation in the post-Tiananmen era, and the unique institutional features of the CCP increased the difficulties of transition to a more open political system. Unlike average authoritarian regimes, such as personal dictatorships, military juntas, or non-Leninist one-party regimes, for instance Singapore's People's Action Party (PAP) and Mexico's Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI) before 2000, Communist totalitarian regimes have a programmatic ideology, better-organized ruling parties, a more systematic use of terror as a means of rule, greater influence over the economy through planning and state-owned enterprises, more effective control of military and security forces, and an unrivaled capacity to dominate society and restrict the flow of information.18

此外，中共高层领导人在20世纪80年代做出的关键选择、中共在后天安门时代有效的调整以及中共独特的制度特征，都增加了向更加开放的政治体制过渡的难度。与一般的威权政权（例如个人独裁政权、军政府或非列宁主义的一党制政权，如2000年以前的新加坡人民行动党和墨西哥革命制度党）不同，共产主义极权政权拥有纲领性意识形态、组织更严密的执政党、更系统地运用恐怖手段进行统治、通过计划经济和国有企业对经济施加更大影响、对军队和安全部队的控制更有效，以及无与伦比的社会控制和信息流通限制能力。

These institutional features make it much more difficult to democratize a totalitarian regime than an authoritarian one. The transition to democracy in a garden-variety dictatorship usually involves the ruling elites' exit from power and the establishment of civilian control over the military. But in the case of totalitarianism, such a transition requires changes in practically every facet of the political system, economy, and society because totalitarian rule itself is deeply embedded in them. Piecemeal reform in a totalitarian regime is unlikely to have much of an impact in terms of changing the nature of the system because the old system will retain its totalitarian essence unless the most important institutional features of totalitarianism—above all the Leninist party-state—are removed.

这些制度特征使得极权政体的民主化远比威权政体的民主化困难得多。在普通的独裁政体中，向民主的过渡通常意味着统治精英退出权力中心，并建立文官对军队的控制。但对于极权主义而言，这种过渡几乎需要对政治体制、经济和社会的方方面面进行变革，因为极权统治本身已深深植根于其中。对极权政体进行零散的改革不太可能对改变体制的本质产生多大影响，因为除非极权主义最重要的制度特征——尤其是列宁主义的党国体制——被彻底清除，否则旧体制仍将保留其极权本质。

A quick review of democratization in the former Communist regimes beginning in the late 1980s and culminating in the fall of the Soviet Union in December 1991 shows that this process was accomplished almost exclusively through revolution—the rapid overthrow of the Communist regimes. To be sure, the Communist regimes in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union in the late 1980s were post-totalitarian regimes that had abandoned some of the essential practices of classic totalitarianism, in particular the permanent purge and mass terror, but they still retained other defining features of totalitarianism, especially the Leninist party-state, a command economy, and near-total control of the flow of information. However, once it became clear that the Soviet Union would no longer intervene militarily to keep the Communist regimes in its satellite states in power, spontaneous revolutionary movements overthrew these regimes and replaced them with democracy.19

快速回顾一下前共产主义政权自20世纪80年代末开始、直至1991年12月苏联解体而最终走向民主化的进程，就会发现这一过程几乎完全是通过革命——即迅速推翻共产主义政权——实现的。诚然，20世纪80年代末东欧和前苏联的共产主义政权是后极权主义政权，它们放弃了一些经典极权主义的基本做法，特别是持续不断的清洗和大规模恐怖活动，但它们仍然保留了极权主义的其他一些显著特征，尤其是列宁主义的党国体制、计划经济以及对信息流动的近乎完全的控制。然而，一旦苏联不再以军事手段维持其卫星国共产主义政权的统治，自发的革命运动便推翻了这些政权，代之以民主。

If the rapid downfall of the Soviet-backed Communist regimes in Eastern Europe is easier to explain, the collapse of the Soviet Union itself perhaps shows that even an indigenous Communist regime becomes vulnerable to revolution if it attempts to reform and weaken the foundational institutions of totalitarianism as part of a gradual process of political reform. In the Soviet case, reformist leader Mikhail Gorbachev introduced glasnost and perestroika in an attempt to revitalize the moribund system. But Gorbachev's gamble on openness, pluralism, and competition to create a more humane system quickly unleashed revolutionary forces, in particular nationalism in the republics of the empire. As reform turned into revolution, Gorbachev ultimately lost control and became the gravedigger of Soviet communism.20

如果说东欧苏联支持的共产主义政权的迅速垮台更容易解释，那么苏联自身的解体或许表明，即使是本土共产主义政权，如果试图通过渐进式的政治改革来改革和削弱极权主义的基础制度，也会变得容易受到革命的冲击。以苏联为例，改革派领导人米哈伊尔·戈尔巴乔夫推行了“公开性”（glasnost）和“改革”（perestroika），试图重振这个奄奄一息的体制。但戈尔巴乔夫押注于开放、多元和竞争，试图建立一个更人道的制度，却迅速释放了革命力量，尤其是在帝国各加盟共和国中滋生的民族主义。随着改革演变为革命，戈尔巴乔夫最终失去了控制，成为了苏联共产主义的掘墓人。

Although the fall of the Soviet Union is the only case of the overthrow of a Communist regime founded by an indigenous revolution, it raises the question whether totalitarian regimes can be transformed into a democracy through reform, not revolution. Admittedly, the Soviet Union under Gorbachev was the only indigenous Communist regime that attempted to save the crisis-ridden system with political reform, not economic reform. Yet, because Gorbachev's glasnost and perestroika succeeded in dismantling the foundations of post-totalitarian rule (most critically the Communist party's political monopoly), the Soviet case remains the only instance in which a posttotalitarian regime was replaced by another political regime (a weak democracy in the Russian case). Instructively, indigenous Communist regimes such as China and Vietnam that embraced capitalism but resisted political liberalization have gained unprecedented economic prosperity but have also retained the key political institutions of totalitarianism.21 The absence of democratization in such regimes implies that economic modernization alone is unlikely to result in the transition to a different political regime. Political reform that fatally weakens the foundational institutions of totalitarianism, as in the case of the Soviet Union in the late 1980s, may be the only path to democracy for a totalitarian or a post-totalitarian regime.

尽管苏联解体是唯一一个由本土革命建立的共产主义政权被推翻的案例，但它引发了一个问题：极权政权能否通过改革而非革命转型为民主政体？诚然，戈尔巴乔夫领导下的苏联是唯一一个试图通过政治改革而非经济改革来挽救危机重重的体制的本土共产主义政权。然而，由于戈尔巴乔夫的公开性和改革成功地瓦解了后极权统治的基础（最关键的是共产党的政治垄断），苏联的案例仍然是唯一一个后极权政权被另一个政治政权（在俄罗斯，是一个脆弱的民主政体）所取代的例子。值得注意的是，像中国和越南这样的本土共产主义政权，虽然拥抱资本主义，却抵制政治自由化，取得了前所未有的经济繁荣，但也保留了极权主义的关键政治制度。这些政权缺乏民主化意味着，仅靠经济现代化不太可能促成向不同政治体制的过渡。对于极权主义或后极权主义政权而言，或许只有通过政治改革，彻底削弱极权主义的基础制度（例如20世纪80年代末的苏联），才是通往民主的唯一途径。

The preservation of the foundational institutions of totalitarianism—the Leninist party-state, near-total control of information, direct control of the military and the security apparatus, and decisive influence over the economy—also suggests that the revival of totalitarian rule in such regimes is not only possible but also likely if a strongman holds political dominance and decides to return the regime to its totalitarian roots. As totalitarianism in such regimes has never really been uprooted and its principal institutions remain essentially intact, restoring totalitarian rule faces far fewer obstacles than it does in regimes where totalitarianism has been largely dismantled.

极权主义基本制度的保留——列宁主义党国体制、对信息的近乎完全控制、对军队和安全机构的直接控制以及对经济的决定性影响——也表明，如果强人掌握政治权力并决定让政权回归极权主义根源，那么在这些政权中，极权统治的复兴不仅可能，而且极有可能发生。由于这些政权中的极权主义从未真正被根除，其主要制度也基本完好无损，因此，与那些极权主义已被基本瓦解的政权相比，恢复极权统治所面临的障碍要少得多。





How the China Dream Was Broken





中国梦是如何破灭的


When Deng Xiaoping launched his "reform and opening" in 1979, China finally had a chance to realize its dream of becoming a rich and strong country after enduring a "century of humiliation," the period between the start of the First Opium War in 1839 and the founding of the People's Republic of China in October 1949. Economically, the country enjoyed favorable structural conditions to embark on a fast-paced modernization drive. Unlike the Soviet Union, the state-socialist economic system had shallower roots and a more tenuous hold on China. Most of the population lived in the countryside—outside the inefficient state sector. The potential of tapping into the productive capacity suppressed by communism was enormous if the CCP could relax its restrictions on economic freedoms.22 Diverse local conditions forced the state to allow a more decentralized system with greater potential for experimentation, innovation, and private entrepreneurship.23 Demographically, China could reap the immense benefits of a vast young and healthy labor force if it were to adopt policies to make it more productive.24 Geographically, China is located in the world's most economically dynamic region—East Asia—and could not only benefit from trade and investment with Japan, then Asia's economic powerhouse, but also gain from the development experience of the four little dragons, Taiwan, South Korea, Singapore, and Hong Kong, all of which were success stories of globalization.25 Geopolitically, by the end of the 1970s, China had become a strategic partner of the West in the Cold War. Supporting China's modernization drive served the West's security interests.

1979年邓小平发起“改革开放”后，中国终于有机会在经历了“百年屈辱”（即从1839年第一次鸦片战争爆发到1949年10月中华人民共和国成立的这段时期）之后，实现富强国家的梦想。经济上，中国拥有良好的结构性条件，可以开展快速的现代化进程。与苏联不同，中国的社会主义国家经济体制根基较浅，对中国的控制力也较为薄弱。大部分人口生活在农村，不在效率低下的国有经济体系之内。如果中共能够放松对经济自由的限制，那么释放被共产主义压制的生产力潜力将是巨大的。22 各地不同的国情迫使国家允许建立一个更加分散的体系，从而为试验、创新和私人创业创造更大的潜力。23 从人口结构上看，如果中国采取政策提高劳动力的生产率，就能从庞大的年轻健康劳动力中获得巨大的收益。24 从地理位置上看，中国位于世界上经济最具活力的地区——东亚，不仅可以从与当时亚洲经济强国日本的贸易和投资中获益，还可以借鉴“四小龙”（台湾、韩国、新加坡和香港）的发展经验，它们都是全球化的成功典范。25 从地缘政治角度来看，到20世纪70年代末，中国已成为冷战时期西方的战略伙伴。支持中国的现代化进程符合西方的安全利益。

While the preconditions for China's economic take-off at the end of the Maoist period were overwhelmingly positive, the preconditions for political liberalization or democratization were mostly negative. It is true that, ideologically, the calamity of the Cultural Revolution had thoroughly discredited Maoism, weakened the party's hold on Chinese society, and motivated Deng Xiaoping to adopt pro-market economic policies.26 But most preconditions for genuine political liberalization or democratization were either nonexistent or downright unfavorable.

尽管毛泽东时代末期中国经济腾飞的先决条件总体上是积极的，但政治自由化或民主化的先决条件却大多是消极的。诚然，从意识形态上看，文化大革命的灾难性后果彻底败坏了毛泽东思想，削弱了党对中国社会的控制，并促使邓小平采取亲市场经济政策。但真正意义上的政治自由化或民主化的大多数先决条件要么不存在，要么极其不利。

Crucially, the strategic choice made by the dominant Chinese leaders, mainly Deng Xiaoping and his conservative rival Chen Yun, was to repair and preserve the rule of the CCP, albeit with more pragmatic economic policies. They not only viewed political liberalization, let alone democratization, with intense hostility, but also they had launched periodic crackdowns in the 1980s to rein in any trends threatening the party's hold on power. Although liberal reformers were represented in the top echelons of the regime, they lacked the power to push the party toward greater political openness.

至关重要的是，以邓小平及其保守派对手陈云为首的中国主导领导人做出的战略选择是，尽管采取了更为务实的经济政策，但仍然致力于修复和维护中共的统治。他们不仅对政治自由化，更遑论民主化抱有强烈的敌意，而且在20世纪80年代还曾多次进行镇压，以遏制任何可能威胁党的权力的趋势。尽管自由派改革者在政权高层中占有一席之地，但他们缺乏推动党走向更大政治开放的权力。

If the unfavorable balance of power at the top precluded the possibility of an elite-led transition toward a more open society, the likelihood of a transition driven by societal forces was vanishingly small due to the legacies of three decades of totalitarian rule. As the most repressive form of dictatorship in human history, totalitarianism concentrates power and resources in the party-state and seeks to eliminate all potential threats to its rule. In totalitarian regimes established through revolution, the process of consolidating power typically entails the brutal destruction of social forces deemed to be threats to regime survival.27 Consequently, societal groups, such as independent civic organizations, religious groups, and business associations, are not permitted in totalitarian regimes. The private sector is either strictly controlled by or beholden to the state (as in the case of Nazi Germany), or almost completely banned (as under Communist rule).28 In the Chinese case, societal forces that might have pressured the CCP to liberalize the political system were too weak to become politically significant. Even though these groups grew as the result of economic development, the restrictions imposed by the Chinese regime prevented them from becoming truly autonomous and effective political actors.29

如果说高层权力失衡阻碍了精英主导向更开放社会的转型，那么由于三十年极权统治的遗毒，由社会力量驱动的转型可能性微乎其微。作为人类历史上最残酷的独裁形式，极权主义将权力和资源集中在党国手中，并试图消除一切对其统治的潜在威胁。在通过革命建立的极权政权中，巩固权力的过程通常意味着残酷镇压被视为政权生存威胁的社会力量。因此，在极权政权中，诸如独立公民组织、宗教团体和商业协会等社会团体是不被允许存在的。私营部门要么受到国家的严格控制或受制于国家（如纳粹德国），要么几乎完全被禁止（如共产党统治时期）。在中国，那些可能迫使中共政治体制自由化的社会力量过于薄弱，无法产生重要的政治影响力。尽管这些群体随着经济发展而壮大，但中国政府施加的限制阻止了它们成为真正自主有效的政治力量。

Thus the party's monopoly of power faced no real threats from within or without. The most important consequence of the post-Mao rulers' decision to rely on economic reform to save the party was the preservation of the key institutions of totalitarianism. Indeed, except for the decline of the orthodox Communist ideology and erosion of the party's control of the economy, practically all other components of totalitarianism remained intact throughout the post-Mao period. To be sure, Deng and other Chinese leaders sought to set up guardrails to prevent the return of a Mao-like figure who could restore personalistic rule and again terrorize the party. Unfortunately, the specific measures on term limits and protection of the rights of party members that had been introduced in the 1980s were too narrow and vague (for example, they set no explicit age or term limits for Politburo members or for the general secretary). As rules and norms are unenforceable in a dictatorship and Chinese leaders' resistance to democratization and the rule of law made it impossible for enforcement by independent third parties (such as the courts, the press, or voters), the limited reforms adopted by Deng in the 1980s were inherently incapable of preventing the return of totalitarian rule. Fortunately for the party, and for China, the fragile balance of power among rival leaders and their factions between 1979 and 2012 sustained collective leadership and ensured the continuation of Deng's pragmatic policies.

因此，党的权力垄断并未面临来自内部或外部的真正威胁。后毛泽东时代的统治者决定依靠经济改革来挽救党，其最重要的后果是维护了极权主义的关键制度。事实上，除了正统共产主义意识形态的衰落和党对经济控制的削弱之外，极权主义的几乎所有其他组成部分在后毛泽东时代都保持完好。诚然，邓小平和其他中国领导人试图设立一些保障措施，以防止出现类似毛泽东的人物，从而恢复个人统治并再次恐吓党。然而，不幸的是，20世纪80年代出台的关于任期限制和保护党员权利的具体措施过于狭隘和模糊（例如，这些措施没有明确规定政治局委员或总书记的年龄或任期限制）。在独裁政权下，规则和规范难以执行，而中国领导人对民主化和法治的抵制又使得独立的第三方（例如法院、媒体或选民）无法有效强制执行，因此邓小平在20世纪80年代推行的有限改革根本无法阻止极权统治的回归。所幸的是，1979年至2012年间各派领导人及其派系之间脆弱的权力平衡维持了集体领导，并确保了邓小平务实政策的延续，这对党和中国而言都至关重要。

During the pre-Xi period, however, totalitarianism was merely lying dormant. The party had suspended or curtailed policies and practices associated with classic totalitarianism, most importantly the mass terror and the near-total control of the economy. But as long as the party kept intact the foundational institutions of totalitarianism, the possibility of its revival was both real and substantial. All it would take was the return of a leader who, driven both by his ideological beliefs and his personal ambitions, found that the restoration of totalitarian rule would best serve his goals and interests. Because the limited reforms introduced by Deng were too weak or too flawed to preclude this scenario, the return of totalitarian rule, however unthinkable to many, remained a real possibility. Once a strongman were to gain power in the party, he would face no real opposition from within to make himself into a Mao-like figure, while the preservation of the essential institutions of totalitarianism would enable him to revive such a regime with relative ease.

然而，在习近平时代之前，极权主义只是处于蛰伏状态。中共暂停或缩减了与传统极权主义相关的政策和做法，其中最重要的是大规模恐怖统治和对经济的近乎完全的控制。但只要中共保留了极权主义的基础制度，极权主义复兴的可能性就既真实又巨大。只需要一位领导人回归，他既受意识形态信念的驱使，又受个人野心的驱使，认为恢复极权统治最符合其目标和利益。由于邓小平推行的有限改革力度不足或存在诸多缺陷，无法阻止这种情况的发生，因此，极权统治的回归——尽管对许多人来说难以想象——仍然是一个现实的可能性。一旦一位强人在党内掌权，他便不会面临来自内部的任何真正阻力，从而可以把自己塑造成毛泽东式的人物，而极权主义基本制度的保留将使他能够相对轻松地恢复这样的政权。

In addition to the dormant totalitarian institutions, the flaws of Deng's neo-authoritarian developmentalism—economic modernization under one-party rule—were also responsible for the return of totalitarianism. Neo-authoritarian developmentalism rests on two pillars: repression of organized opposition and civil liberties, and a single-minded focus on economic development. However appealing in theory, neo-authoritarian developmentalism not only is unsustainable in practice but also creates political conditions favorable for the return of a totalitarian leader. Economic development under autocratic rule faces two insurmountable obstacles. The first is the lack of rule of law—the foundation of property rights and a market economy. As dictatorships are unwilling to be constrained by the rule of law and have short time horizons due to their insecurity, state predation is a structural feature of dictatorship. Property rights will therefore remain permanently insecure in countries ruled by dictatorships, thus undermining investor confidence and inherently limiting the economic potential of these countries.30 The second hurdle is the trap of partial economic reform. A dictatorship desperate to gain political legitimacy by improving economic performance may initially be willing to adopt radical reforms, but it will have decreasing incentives to pursue further radical reforms because the early success of its reform strengthens its legitimacy and reduces the pressures for further change. Critically, economic reforms under dictatorial rule tend to become more difficult politically as they progress because the most radical or thorough reforms require a full empowerment of market forces, decentralization of resources, and a concomitant curtailment of the power of the state. As complete market reforms threaten to limit the ability of the ruling elites to use their power to extract economic benefits, such reforms become less attractive to the ruling elites, who become more reluctant to undertake them. Economic stagnation, not sustained dynamism, will likely follow.31

除了潜伏的极权主义机构之外，邓小平的新威权发展主义——即一党专政下的经济现代化——的缺陷也是极权主义死灰复燃的原因之一。新威权发展主义建立在两大支柱之上：镇压有组织的反对派和公民自由，以及一味追求经济发展。然而，新威权发展主义在理论上看似诱人，但在实践中不仅难以为继，而且还会为极权主义领导人的回归创造有利的政治条件。专制统治下的经济发展面临两大难以逾越的障碍。首先是缺乏法治——即财产权和市场经济的基础。由于独裁政权不愿受法治约束，且因其自身缺乏安全感而目光短浅，因此国家掠夺是独裁政权的结构性特征。因此，在独裁统治的国家，产权将始终处于不安全状态，从而削弱投资者信心，并从根本上限制这些国家的经济潜力。第二个障碍是局部经济改革的陷阱。一个急于通过改善经济表现来获得政治合法性的独裁政权，最初可能愿意采取激进的改革，但随着改革初期取得的成功，其进一步推行激进改革的动力会逐渐减弱，因为改革的早期成功会增强其合法性，并降低进一步改革的压力。至关重要的是，在独裁统治下，经济改革往往会随着推进而变得更加困难，因为最激进或最彻底的改革需要充分发挥市场力量、分散资源，并相应地削弱国家权力。由于彻底的市场改革有可能限制统治精英利用其权力攫取经济利益的能力，因此这类改革对统治精英的吸引力会降低，他们也会变得更加不愿推行这些改革。经济停滞而非持续活力很可能接踵而至。

A combination of autocracy and a partial reform trap inevitably produces crony capitalism characterized by collusion between political elites and capitalists who use their connections with political elites to gain access to privileges and opportunities unavailable to those outside such networks. This union allows political elites in an autocracy to convert their power into wealth. As crony capitalism exacerbates inequality and corruption by privileging only the well-connected, it stokes social tensions and accelerates regime decay, thus creating opportunities for a strongman to seize power by weaponizing anticorruption investigations to destroy his political rivals and their networks.32 This is precisely what happened after Xi became party chief in late 2012.

专制政体与局部改革陷阱的结合，必然会催生裙带资本主义。裙带资本主义的特点是政治精英与资本家勾结，后者利用与政治精英的关系获取特权和机会，而这些特权和机会是圈外人无法企及的。这种结合使得专制政体中的政治精英能够将权力转化为财富。裙带资本主义通过只偏袒关系密切者，加剧了不平等和腐败，从而激化了社会矛盾，加速了政权的衰败，并为强人利用反腐调查打击政治对手及其关系网夺取政权创造了机会。这正是习近平在2012年底担任中共中央总书记后所发生的情况。

In retrospect, the relative ease with which Xi could turn back the clock and restore a form of totalitarian rule few had thought would be possible was not a random outcome of Chinese history in the post-Mao era. To be sure, the leader responsible for this great leap backward—Xi Jinping—might have been an accident, as his rise to the top echelons of the CCP was by no means preordained or inevitable. But in the larger political context of the post-Mao era, in particular the deliberate choices made by Deng and other hard-liners to maintain and defend the party's political monopoly at all costs, the preservation of the foundational institutions of totalitarianism, and the inherent flaws of Deng's neo-authoritarian developmentalism, the conditions for the revival of totalitarian rule were both ever-present and highly favorable. In other words, that the post-Mao reforms ended with a new form of totalitarian rule reminiscent of Stalinism was an accident waiting to happen.

回望过去，习近平能够如此轻易地让历史倒退，恢复一种几乎无人预料的极权统治形式，并非后毛泽东时代中国历史的偶然结果。诚然，造成这一巨大倒退的领导人——习近平——或许是个意外，因为他登上中共高层并非命中注定或必然。但在后毛泽东时代的大背景下，尤其是在邓小平和其他强硬派不惜一切代价维护和捍卫党的政治垄断、极权主义基础制度的保留以及邓小平新威权发展主义的固有缺陷等因素的影响下，极权统治的复兴条件始终存在且极为有利。换言之，后毛泽东时代的改革最终以一种类似斯大林主义的新型极权统治形式告终，这并非偶然。





Argument in Brief





简要论证


Post-Mao China has experienced three distinct eras: the reform era of the 1980s, the neo-authoritarian era (1992-2012), and neo-Stalinist era under Xi Jinping since 2013.33 Despite the identifiable ruptures between these eras, they are all connected by the logic of path dependence. Chinese leadership's strategic choices in one era narrow the range of options and potential paths forward in the subsequent eras as these choices produce outcomes that increase the probability of certain developments and decrease the probability of other developments in later periods.

后毛泽东时代的中国经历了三个截然不同的时期：20世纪80年代的改革开放时期、新威权主义时期（1992-2012年）以及习近平领导下的新斯大林主义时期（2013年至今）。尽管这些时期之间存在明显的断裂，但它们都遵循路径依赖的逻辑。中国领导层在一个时期做出的战略选择会缩小后续时期的选择范围和潜在发展路径，因为这些选择会产生一些结果，这些结果会增加某些发展趋势发生的概率，同时降低另一些发展趋势发生的概率。

Specifically, path dependence means that China had the widest range of options in the 1980s. During that decade, unsurprisingly, the intense struggle at the highest level of the Chinese leadership centered on the three potential paths forward. Hard-liners advocated returning to a communist system without Maoist radicalism. Pragmatic Leninists wanted to embrace capitalism to save a crisis-ridden regime. Liberal reformers tried to institute both political and economic reforms to steer the party away from its totalitarian roots. The decisive defeat of the liberals in 1989 eliminated the third option. In the post-Tiananmen period, pragmatic Leninists led by Deng seized the fall of the Soviet Union in December 1991 to rally a demoralized party to a neo-authoritarian path of capitalist development under one-party rule. This strategy in the subsequent two decades initially produced unprecedented economic dynamism but gradually succumbed to rapacious autocratic cronyism. The legacy of the post-Tiananmen order—pervasive official corruption, moribund market reforms, and sophisticated and effective repressive capacity—opened a potential path for a strongman to gain dominance and revert to totalitarian rule. Although the party could conceivably continue to plod along its post-Tiananmen path under a different leader, it was just as likely that it could embark on an entirely different path—one toward a new form of totalitarian rule under a strongman. If anything, the odds of revival of totalitarianism were even greater because a potential strongman could easily purge corruption-tainted rivals to seek supremacy within the regime. The same strongman could deploy totalitarian repressive practices to reimpose strict control over society because the coercive institutions of totalitarianism, such as a party-controlled military, the secret police, mass surveillance, and networks of informants, not only had been preserved, but also had been significantly upgraded with technology and investments in the post-Tiananmen era.

具体而言，路径依赖意味着中国在20世纪80年代拥有最广泛的选择。不出所料，在那十年间，中国最高领导层内部的激烈斗争围绕着三条潜在的发展道路展开。强硬派主张回归没有毛泽东式激进主义的共产主义制度；务实的列宁主义者希望拥抱资本主义以挽救危机重重的政权；自由派改革者则试图推行政治和经济改革，引导党摆脱其极权主义根源。1989年自由派的惨败排除了第三条道路。在天安门事件之后，以邓小平为首的务实列宁主义者抓住1991年12月苏联解体的契机，将士气低落的党重新凝聚起来，走上一条在单一政党统治下发展资本主义的新威权主义道路。在随后的二十年里，这一战略最初带来了前所未有的经济活力，但逐渐被贪婪的专制裙带关系所吞噬。天安门事件后遗留的弊端——普遍存在的官僚腐败、停滞不前的市场改革以及精密有效的镇压手段——为强人攫取权力、重回极权统治铺平了道路。尽管党在不同的领导人带领下或许可以继续沿着天安门后的道路前进，但它同样有可能走上一条截然不同的道路——一条由强人主导的新型极权统治之路。事实上，极权主义复兴的可能性甚至更大，因为潜在的强人可以轻易地清除沾染腐败的竞争对手，从而在政权内部攫取至高无上的地位。同样的强人还可以运用极权主义的镇压手段，重新对社会实施严格的控制，因为极权主义的强制机构，例如党控军队、秘密警察、大规模监控和线人网络，不仅被保留了下来，而且在天安门事件后还通过技术和投资得到了显著的升级。

The logic of path dependence similarly illuminates the trajectory of Chinese economic development in the post-Mao era. Thanks to its favorable demographic structure, pent-up entrepreneurial energy in society, and cooperative relations with the West, the economy was poised for a massive and rapid take-off if the party dismantled the old Communist economic institutions and adopted pro-market policies. Even though China indeed experienced an economic “miracle” that was marked by three decades of high economic growth, Deng's strategic choice of using economic reform and globalization to sustain one-party rule inevitably resulted in the loss of momentum of reform. Dictated by the political imperative of preserving one-party rule, Deng and his successors simply could not risk ceding the “commanding heights” to the private sector and foreign investors. The principle of preventing market reform from undermining one-party rule would severely limit the growth of the private sector and shield the state-owned enterprises from competition, resulting in a hybrid economy that would eventually stagnate. Even worse, the same principle could also lead to the rollback of the private sector if the regime wants to contain the threats of capitalism. Seen from this perspective, the reversal of post-Mao economic reform under Xi is no accident.

路径依赖的逻辑同样可以解释后毛泽东时代中国经济发展的轨迹。得益于有利的人口结构、社会中蕴藏的创业活力以及与西方的合作关系，如果党解散旧的共产主义经济体制并采取亲市场的政策，中国经济本可以实现大规模的快速腾飞。尽管中国确实经历了长达三十年的高速经济增长，创造了经济“奇迹”，但邓小平利用经济改革和全球化来维持一党专政的战略选择，不可避免地导致了改革势头的减弱。出于维护一党专政的政治需要，邓小平及其继任者根本不敢将“制高点”拱手让给私营部门和外国投资者。防止市场改革破坏一党专政的原则，将严重限制私营部门的发展，并使国有企业免受竞争，最终导致混合型经济的停滞不前。更糟糕的是，如果政权想要遏制资本主义的威胁，同样的原则也可能导致私营部门的倒退。从这个角度来看，习近平时期毛泽东时代经济改革的逆转绝非偶然。

China's relationship with the West in the post-Mao era cannot escape the confines of path dependence, either. National weakness, the Soviet threat, and the party's desperate need for Western support necessitated a pragmatist foreign policy prioritizing economic development over ideological conflict with the West. The United States and its allies opened their arms to reintegrate China into the West-led economic order in the 1980s, motivated by shared security interests and the tantalizing prospects that Chinese reforms could promote both economic prosperity and political freedom in the country. When the Tiananmen crackdown in 1989 abruptly ended China's strategic partnership with the West and revealed their unbridgeable ideological divide, the path to full integration was nearly closed. The success of the post-Deng regime in pursuing a grand strategy of "hiding strength and biding time" in the post-Cold War era only increased the odds of a new cold war later as a far more powerful China began to assert its newly acquired power and challenge the US-led order. With the arrival of Xi in late 2012, the combination of his ideological hostility, geopolitical ambitions, and strategic miscalculations—all of them direct or indirect consequences of the revival of totalitarian rule—would lead to a series of confrontations with the United States and its allies that eventually escalated to a new cold war.

后毛泽东时代中国与西方的关系也无法摆脱路径依赖的束缚。国家实力的削弱、苏联的威胁以及中共对西方支持的迫切需求，迫使中国奉行务实的对外政策，优先发展经济发展而非与西方进行意识形态冲突。20世纪80年代，出于共同的安全利益以及中国改革可能促进经济繁荣和政治自由的诱人前景，美国及其盟友张开双臂，试图将中国重新纳入西方主导的经济秩序。然而，1989年的天安门事件突然终结了中国与西方的战略伙伴关系，并暴露了双方无法弥合的意识形态分歧，全面融入西方世界的道路几乎就此关闭。后邓小平时代，后邓小平政权奉行“蓄势待发”的宏大战略，其成功反而增加了日后爆发新冷战的可能性，因为实力远超以往的中国开始展现其新获得的实力，并挑战美国主导的秩序。随着习近平在 2012 年底上台，他的意识形态敌意、地缘政治野心和战略误判——所有这些都是极权统治复兴的直接或间接后果——将导致与美国及其盟友的一系列对抗，最终升级为一场新的冷战。





Organization of the Book





本书的结构


To understand how political and economic developments since 1979 gradually narrowed the range of alternatives and increased the probability of the revival of totalitarian rule, this book uses a chronological approach to describe and analyze the most critical events, decisions, and factors that shaped the political and economic trajectories during three distinct periods in post-Mao China: the 1980s, the post-Tiananmen era, and the era of Xi Jinping. Chapter 1 focuses on elite politics and factional struggles over the direction of reform in the 1980s, the most politically open decade that ended with the tragic crackdown on the prodemocracy movement in June 1989. Chapter 2 reexamines the introduction of market-oriented reforms in the 1980s, with a special focus on how the rapid decollectivization of agriculture unleashed pent-up entrepreneurship and created a fast-growing private sector. In chapter 3 we dissect the neo-authoritarian political order, which the CCP constructed during the first decade of the post-Tiananmen era under Jiang Zemin's leadership. We explore how the CCP's adaptation of this neo-authoritarian political order enabled the regime to survive the shocks of the fall of communism in the former Soviet bloc and to confront the threats of economic modernization. Chapter 4 examines the policies adopted by the party during the Hu Jintao era to address the social deficits produced by neo-authoritarian rule, and it probes the factors that contributed to the unraveling of the post-Tiananmen order. In chapter 5 we analyze the drivers of China's rapid economic growth in the post-Mao era. Chapter 6 traces the rise of Xi Jinping and the return of totalitarian rule. The story of the end of China's economic miracle is told in chapter 7. In chapter 8 we review and analyze how China's engagement with the West in the post-Mao era eventually ended in a new cold war.

为了理解自1979年以来政治经济发展如何逐步缩小选择范围并增加极权统治复兴的可能性，本书采用时间顺序的方法，描述和分析了后毛泽东时代中国三个不同时期——20世纪80年代、天安门事件后以及习近平时代——塑造政治经济轨迹的关键事件、决策和因素。第一章重点关注20世纪80年代精英政治和围绕改革方向的派系斗争。80年代是政治最为开放的十年，最终以1989年6月对民主运动的悲剧性镇压而告终。第二章重新审视了20世纪80年代市场导向型改革的引入，特别关注农业的快速去集体化如何释放了被压抑的创业精神，并催生了快速增长的私营部门。第三章剖析了中共在江泽民领导下，于后天安门时代第一个十年构建的新威权政治秩序。我们探讨了中共如何通过对这一新威权政治秩序的调整，使其政权得以在苏联解体后共产主义阵营的冲击下幸存，并应对经济现代化带来的威胁。第四章考察了胡锦涛时期中共为解决新威权统治造成的社会弊端而采取的政策，并探究了导致后天安门时代秩序瓦解的因素。第五章分析了后毛泽东时代中国经济快速增长的驱动因素。第六章追溯了习近平的崛起和极权统治的回归。第七章讲述了中国经济奇迹的终结。第八章回顾并分析了后毛泽东时代中国与西方的交往最终如何演变为一场新冷战。





1 The Decisive Decade





1 决定性的十年


AFTER DENG Xiaoping and his coalition partners ousted the transitional leader Hua Guofeng at the end of 1978, they faced the momentous strategic choice of deciding on a path forward for the party and the country. Ideological differences within Deng's coalition over the direction of economic reform resulted in constant clashes over economic policy and political liberalization. As a result, politics in the 1980s was marked by persistent tensions and power struggle at the highest level of the leadership of the Chinese Communist Party, culminating in the Tiananmen crisis in June 1989. On the surface, fluidity of elite politics in this period may imply a wide range of outcomes, including simultaneous pro-market reforms and political liberalization. In hindsight, however, the forces arrayed against such an outcome were simply too powerful to overcome. Nevertheless, the decade of the 1980s presented a narrow window of opportunity for China to embark on a different political path. Indeed, during that decade, the party attempted a series of institutional reforms, some aimed to make the regime less totalitarian and others designed to open up the political process in a more pluralistic and accountable direction. Tragically, the Tiananmen crackdown foreclosed this narrow path toward an alternative—and arguably better—future. The purge of the liberals from the CCP leadership and Deng's success in forging an elite consensus on capitalist economic development under one-party rule put China on an entirely different path in the post-Tiananmen era.

1978年底，邓小平及其执政联盟推翻了过渡领导人华国锋后，面临着决定党和国家未来发展道路的重大战略抉择。邓小平执政联盟内部在经济改革方向上的意识形态分歧，导致在经济政策和政治自由化问题上不断发生冲突。因此，20世纪80年代的政治局势充斥着中共最高领导层的持续紧张局势和权力斗争，最终在1989年6月爆发了天安门事件。表面上看，这一时期精英政治的流动性似乎意味着多种可能的结果，包括同时推行市场化改革和政治自由化。然而，事后看来，阻碍这种结果的力量实在太强大，难以克服。尽管如此，20世纪80年代仍然为中国提供了一个短暂的机遇窗口，使其有机会走上一条不同的政治道路。事实上，在那十年间，中共尝试了一系列制度改革，其中一些旨在减少政权的极权性，另一些则旨在使政治进程朝着更加多元化和负责的方向发展。然而，悲剧的是，天安门事件扼杀了这条通往另一种——或许也更好的——未来的狭窄道路。中共领导层中自由派的清洗，以及邓小平成功地在一党专政下就资本主义经济发展达成精英共识，使得后天安门时代的中国走上了一条截然不同的道路。

Broadly speaking, this period can be divided into three phases, each marked with its distinct characteristics of struggle over power and policy among the party's top leaders. In the first phase (1979-1986), China's era of reform and opening was launched, and rapid progress in economic reform was made. It was also a period of relative political openness, in spite of one short-lived conservative backlash at the end of 1983. Assisted by two liberal reformers, Hu Yaobang as CCP chief and Zhao Ziyang as premier, Deng was able to decollectivize agriculture, reintegrate China into the global economy, and implement the reforms to enable a private sector to emerge and grow. Politically, he also enacted modest changes to institute collective leadership, mandatory retirement, and measures to introduce fresh blood into the party.

总体而言，这一时期可分为三个阶段，每个阶段都以党内高层领导人之间围绕权力和政策的斗争为鲜明特征。在第一阶段（1979-1986年），中国开启了改革开放时代，经济改革取得了快速进展。尽管1983年底出现了一次短暂的保守主义反弹，但这一时期也相对政治开放。在中共中央总书记胡耀邦和总理赵紫阳两位自由派改革者的协助下，邓小平实现了农业非集体化，使中国重新融入全球经济，并推行了促进私营部门发展壮大的改革。在政治上，他也进行了一系列温和的改革，包括实行集体领导制、强制退休制度以及为党注入新鲜血液等。

But the informal coalition that toppled Hua Guofeng, the transitional leader who had seized power in October 1976 and effectively ended the Cultural Revolution, fractured during this phase because of incompatible visions about China's future. As he shared the conservative political values of the hardliners led by Chen Yun but clashed with them on economic policy, Deng played a pivotal balancing role in this phase. As reform unleashed growing societal pressure for political liberalization, the rift between Deng and the liberal wing of the party widened, ultimately resulting in Deng's dismissal of Hu in January 1987.

但推翻华国锋（这位在1976年10月夺取政权并有效结束文化大革命的过渡领导人）的非正式联盟，在这一阶段因对中国未来愿景的分歧而瓦解。邓小平虽然与陈云领导的强硬派在政治价值观上存在分歧，但在经济政策上却与他们意见相左，因此在这一阶段发挥了关键的平衡作用。随着改革开放引发社会对政治自由化的呼声日益高涨，邓小平与党内自由派之间的裂痕不断扩大，最终导致邓小平于1987年1月解除了胡锦涛的职务。

In the second phase, 1987-1988, momentum of reform slowed down despite an abortive attempt to introduce comprehensive political reform in 1987. Hu's ouster not only weakened the liberals in the party but also undermined Deng's own ability to overcome resistance to further economic reform by the newly emboldened hard-liners. After Deng filled Hu's vacancy with Zhao, he effectively ceded the control of economic policy to the conservatives who took over the State Council. Even before the Tiananmen crisis in 1989, the third and final phase, Deng's reform and opening had stalled. Siding again with hard-liners during the most critical moments of the crisis, Deng stained his historical legacy by ordering the military to suppress the peaceful prodemocracy movement. Even worse, the wholesale purge of the liberals within the party and the worst rupture with the West in the wake of the crackdown threatened a premature demise of Deng's cherished project of reform and opening. As a result, the decade of the 1980s began with hope and optimism for a new future but ended with one of the darkest and bloodiest incidents in modern Chinese history.

在第二阶段（1987-1988年），尽管1987年曾尝试推行全面的政治改革，但改革势头有所放缓。胡锦涛的下台不仅削弱了党内的自由派力量，也削弱了邓小平克服新近壮大的强硬派对进一步经济改革的阻力的能力。邓小平任命赵立坚接替胡锦涛的职位后，实际上将经济政策的控制权拱手让给了掌控国务院的保守派。甚至在1989年天安门事件（第三阶段，也是最后一个阶段）之前，邓小平的改革开放就已经停滞不前。在危机最关键的时刻，邓小平再次站在强硬派一边，下令军队镇压和平的民主运动，玷污了自己的历史声誉。更糟糕的是，镇压之后，党内自由派遭到大规模清洗，与西方关系也出现严重破裂，这几乎断送了邓小平毕生心血的改革开放事业。因此，20 世纪 80 年代以对新未来的希望和乐观开始，但最终却以中国现代史上最黑暗、最血腥的事件之一结束。





Ideological Divisions in the Party





党内的意识形态分歧


On October 6, 1976, a military-backed coup led to the arrest of the infamous "Gang of Four," a radical clique that included, among three others, the widow of Mao Zedong, the brutal dictator who had died less than a month earlier. The news of the fall of Mao's closest and most reviled followers quickly set off spontaneous celebrations throughout China. The victor in this succession struggle, Hua Guofeng, was immediately installed as China's new leader. He assumed positions as chairman of the Chinese Communist Party and of the Central Military Commission (CMC), as well as premier of the State Council (China's cabinet).1

1976年10月6日，一场军方支持的政变导致臭名昭著的“四人帮”被捕。这个激进集团成员包括毛泽东的遗孀，毛泽东是位残暴的独裁者，不到一个月前刚刚去世。毛泽东最亲近、最受憎恨的追随者落网的消息迅速在中国各地引发了自发的庆祝活动。这场权力斗争的胜利者华国锋立即被任命为中国新领导人。他先后担任中共中央主席、中央军委主席和国务院总理。

When the 55-year-old Hua took over the party, his position seemed unassailable. Among the twelve voting members of the Politburo, none presented a potential threat. The group that could possibly dethrone Hua was nowhere near the center of power at the end of 1976. Many had already been purged, sidelined, incarcerated, or murdered by Mao during the Cultural Revolution (1966-1976). Among those who had survived physically, Deng Xiaoping, age 72, had been dismissed from all his positions in the party-state by Mao six months earlier. Chen Yun, age 71, a capable economic planner who had ranked number 5 in the party hierarchy in 1956, at the time of Mao's death was simply a member of the Central Committee after falling out of favor with Mao before the Cultural Revolution.

55岁的华春莹接任党主席时，他的地位似乎牢不可破。在十二名政治局委员中，无人构成潜在威胁。1976年底，任何可能推翻华春莹的人都远未跻身权力中心。许多人在文化大革命（1966-1976）期间已被毛泽东清洗、边缘化、监禁甚至杀害。在那些幸存下来的人中，72岁的邓小平在六个月前就被毛泽东解除了所有党政职务。71岁的陈云是一位能干的经济规划师，1956年曾位列党内第五，但在毛泽东去世时，他只是中央委员，因为在文化大革命前就失宠了。

However, rule by the "wise leader," as Hua was then called, was brief. The writing was on the wall when revolutionary veterans forced him to bring back to office the victims of the Cultural Revolution. In July 1977 Deng regained all the leadership positions he had lost after the Tiananmen protests of April 1976, including membership on the Politburo Standing Committee (PSC), vice premier, and chief of the General Staff Department of the People's Liberation Army (PLA).2 At a Central Committee plenum in December 1978, Hua lost a decisive power struggle to a coalition of revolutionary veterans and reformers.3 Although he did not officially resign his position as chairman of the CCP until June 1981, the coup that brought him to the pinnacle of power had merely paved the way for the return of victims of the Cultural Revolution, who shared little else beyond a desire to depose Hua and to end Mao's self-destructive radicalism that had brought the country to the brink of ruin and endangered the party's hold on power.

然而，这位当时被称为“贤君”的华春莹的统治十分短暂。革命老兵迫使他让文化大革命的受害者重返政坛，这预示着他的下场已定。 1977年7月，邓小平重新获得了他在1976年4月天安门事件后失去的所有领导职务，包括政治局常委、国务院副总理和解放军总参谋长。1978年12月，在中央全会上，华春莹在一场决定性的权力斗争中败给了革命老兵和改革派组成的联盟。尽管他直到1981年6月才正式辞去中共中央主席一职，但那场将他推上权力巅峰的政变仅仅为文化大革命受害者的回归铺平了道路。这些人除了希望推翻华春莹、结束毛泽东自毁式的激进主义（这种激进主义曾将国家推向崩溃的边缘，并危及党的统治）之外，几乎没有其他共同点。

The informal grand coalition that ousted Hua in December 1978 was led by Deng and Chen, both titans in the Communist revolution. Deng became the head of the Secretariat of the Central Committee in 1927 when he was only 23 years old. During the civil war (1945-1949), Deng co-commanded the Second Field Army that performed brilliantly in defeating the Nationalists. Between the establishment of the People's Republic in 1949 and the outbreak of the Cultural Revolution in 1966, he had served in a series of top-level party and government positions. In fact, as the seventh-ranked party leader on the eve of the Cultural Revolution, Deng had the dubious honor of being lumped together with Liu Shaoqi, Mao's designated successor, as one of China's top two "capitalist roaders" when Mao unleashed the Red Guards on his enemies in the party in the summer of 1966.

1978年12月推翻华春莹的非正式大联盟由邓小平和陈志刚领导，他们都是共产主义革命的巨擘。邓小平23岁时就担任了1927年的中央书记处书记。在内战（1945-1949）期间，他与陈志刚共同指挥了第二野战军，该军在击败国民党军队的战斗中表现出色。从1949年中华人民共和国成立到1966年文化大革命爆发，他先后担任了一系列党政要职。事实上，在文化大革命前夕，作为党的第七号人物，邓小平与毛泽东指定的接班人刘少奇一起，被毛泽东列为中国两大“走资派”之一。1966年夏天，毛泽东发动红卫兵镇压党内异己时，邓小平也因此“荣膺”这一称号。

Chen Yun's revolutionary credentials were no less illustrious. He was made a member of the Politburo when he was 29. In fact, even though he was one year younger, he had greater seniority than Deng. After the party emerged victorious in the civil war in 1949, Chen became a vice premier, playing an instrumental role in crafting the First Five-Year Plan and constructing the basic framework for a command economy. However, he fell out of favor with Mao in 1958 because he cautioned against Mao's unrealistically ambitious economic targets. But being sidelined by Mao later turned out to be a blessing in disguise. While most of Mao's enemies were politically hounded or even physically liquidated during the Cultural Revolution, Chen escaped persecution and even managed to retain his seat on the Central Committee.

陈云的革命资历同样辉煌。他29岁时当选为政治局委员。事实上，尽管他比邓小平小一岁，但资历却比他更老。1949年党赢得内战胜利后，陈云出任副总理，在制定第一个五年计划和构建计划经济基本框架方面发挥了关键作用。然而，1958年，由于他对毛泽东不切实际的经济目标提出质疑，他失去了毛泽东的信任。但后来，被毛泽东边缘化反而成了因祸得福。在文化大革命期间，毛泽东的大多数政敌都遭到政治迫害甚至被处决，而陈云却幸免于难，甚至保住了中央委员的职位。

Although Deng and Chen played the most important roles in the decisive defeat of Hua and his supporters in December 1978, they were assisted by more liberal-leaning but lower-ranked leaders in the party. The two most prominent representatives of this wing were Hu Yaobang and Zhao Ziyang. Prior to the Cultural Revolution, Hu was the head of the Communist Youth League (CYL), an auxiliary organization of the party that had no real administrative responsibility. A victim of Mao's purge during the decade of chaos, Hu became a supporter of Deng when the latter briefly returned to power in 1973-1975. In the campaign to unseat Hua Guofeng as party leader, Hu made two crucial contributions. Wielding his administrative authority as the head of the party's organization department, he helped rehabilitate a large number of victims of Mao's purges and facilitated their return to positions of power within the party-state.4 In addition, as Hua continued to rely on Maoism as his source of political legitimacy, Hu Yaobang organized a series of articles in 1978 debating the "criterion of truth." Behind this seemingly esoteric philosophical project was the intent to discredit Maoism as the guiding political doctrine of the party and weaken Hua's claim to rule.5

尽管邓小平和陈静在1978年12月华国锋及其支持者的决定性失败中发挥了最关键的作用，但他们也得到了党内一些立场更为自由但级别较低的领导人的协助。这一派别的两位最杰出的代表是胡耀邦和赵紫阳。在文化大革命之前，胡耀邦是共青团（党的辅助组织，没有实际的行政权力）的负责人。在毛泽东的清洗运动中，胡耀邦不幸成为受害者，后来在邓小平1973年至1975年短暂复辟期间转而支持他。在推翻华国锋党魁地位的运动中，胡耀邦做出了两项至关重要的贡献。作为党的组织部部长，胡耀邦利用其行政权力，帮助大量毛泽东清洗运动的受害者恢复名誉，并协助他们重返党国权力岗位。此外，由于华春莹继续依赖毛泽东思想作为其政治合法性的来源，胡耀邦于1978年组织发表了一系列文章，探讨“真理的标准”。这一看似深奥的哲学计划背后，实则意在诋毁毛泽东思想作为党的指导性政治理论，并削弱华春莹的统治地位。

Zhao Ziyang, who had served as provincial party chief in Guangdong, Inner Mongolia, and Sichuan before and during the Cultural Revolution, did not play a direct role in the power struggle in 1978 that made Deng the paramount leader. Zhao had had little prior contact with Deng, but because he implemented bold and successful agricultural reforms in Sichuan in the late 1970s when he was the provincial party chief, Deng picked him to succeed Hua as premier in September 1980.6

赵紫阳在文化大革命前后曾担任广东、内蒙古和四川三省的省委书记，但他并未直接参与1978年邓小平成为最高领导人的权力斗争。赵紫阳此前与邓小平鲜有接触，但由于他在20世纪70年代末担任四川省委书记期间推行了大胆而成功的农业改革，邓小平于1980年9月选择他接替华春莹担任国务院总理。

In an illuminating history of elite conflict in the 1980s, Yang Jisheng persuasively argues that the grand coalition later collapsed into three forces, each with its own distinct ideological values and political agenda. The conflict among these three groups, in Yang's view, defines the politics and shapes the Chinese political and economic trajectories during the decade.7 The forces represented by Chen Yun were hardcore conservatives seeking to maintain the orthodox Communist ideology and the Leninist one-party regime and to return to the pragmatic but essentially state-socialist economic policy and development strategy of the 1950s. The second group, led by Deng, shared the same political objective of preserving the Leninist party-state, but it differed from the conservatives in terms of the economic means by which to reach this goal. As Zhao Ziyang observed, although the elders, such as Deng and Chen, disagreed on economic reform, they had indistinguishable views on maintaining the existing political system. They feared "any real reform would challenge the Communist Party, undermine its power, and weaken its rule."8 Unlike Chen Yun, who was enamored of the Soviet planned economy and took enormous pride in his own role in establishing China's command economy in the early 1950s, Deng was convinced that only an efficient market economy integrated with the capitalist West could save the party.

杨继生在其对20世纪80年代精英冲突的精辟论述中，令人信服地指出，大联盟后来瓦解为三大势力，各自拥有独特的意识形态价值观和政治纲领。杨继生认为，这三大势力之间的冲突定义了80年代的政治格局，并塑造了中国政治和经济的发展轨迹。以陈云为代表的势力是顽固的保守派，他们力图维护正统的共产主义意识形态和列宁主义的一党制，并回归到20世纪50年代务实但本质上仍是国家社会主义的经济政策和发展战略。以邓小平为首的第二大势力与保守派有着相同的政治目标，即维护列宁主义的党国体制，但在实现这一目标的经济手段上存在分歧。正如赵紫阳所观察到的，尽管邓小平、陈云等元老在经济改革问题上存在分歧，但他们在维护现有政治体制方面却有着几乎一致的立场。他们担心“任何真正的改革都会挑战共产党，削弱其权力，削弱其统治。”8 与痴迷于苏联计划经济并为自己在20世纪50年代初建立中国计划经济而感到无比自豪的陈云不同，邓小平坚信，只有与资本主义西方融合的高效市场经济才能拯救共产党。

The third group, represented by a slightly younger cohort of more open-minded leaders, such as Hu Yaobang and Zhao Ziyang, sought both promarket economic reforms and political liberalization because they believed that economic and political reforms were both needed to change a China that had been impoverished and brutalized by Maoism.9

第三组领导人以胡耀邦和赵紫阳为代表，他们年纪稍长，思想也更为开放。他们寻求推行亲市场经济改革和政治自由化，因为他们认为，要改变一个曾被毛泽东思想摧残得贫困不堪的中国，经济和政治改革都必不可少。

Of these three groups, the most powerful were the first two factions: the conservatives led by Chen who wanted to return to the 1950s and the neo-authoritarians represented by Deng who believed that Chinese economic modernization, the sole means of regime survival, could succeed only with a combination of capitalism and autocracy. The political strength of the conservatives and the neo-authoritarians was derived mainly from the personal prestige of their most senior leaders, such as Deng, Chen, and other elderly revolutionaries. They wielded ultimate power on major policy and personnel decisions.

在这三个派别中，势力最强大的是前两个派别：以陈为首的保守派，他们希望回到上世纪五十年代的模式；以及以邓小平为代表的新威权派，他们认为中国经济现代化是政权生存的唯一途径，而只有将资本主义与专制相结合才能取得成功。保守派和新威权派的政治力量主要来源于其最高领导人的个人威望，例如邓小平、陈小平和其他一些老革命家。他们在重大政策和人事决策上拥有最终决定权。

Another source of the political strength of the conservatives and neo-authoritarians was their extensive network of supporters in the bureaucracy of the party-state and the military. Because the conservatives had been in charge of the economy, propaganda, and organization before the Cultural Revolution, they had groomed a group of younger hard-liners whom they appointed to key positions in the party and government. Although Deng had fewer followers in the state and party bureaucracies, he had unrivaled control of the military because he had elevated many of his former subordinates in the Second Field Army to senior PLA positions, such as the General Staff Department and the Secretariat of the CMC, which oversaw the PLA's day-to-day affairs.

保守派和新威权主义者政治力量的另一来源是他们在党政官僚机构和军队中广泛的支持者网络。由于保守派在文化大革命前掌控着经济、宣传和组织工作，他们培养了一批年轻的强硬派，并将他们安插到党政要职。虽然邓小平在国家和党政官僚机构中的追随者较少，但他对军队的控制力无人能及，因为他提拔了许多他在第二野战军的前下属担任解放军高级职务，例如总参谋部和中央军委书记处，后者负责解放军的日常事务。

The sources of political support for the liberals were diverse. Within the party, they could count on a small number of (less influential) revolutionary veterans at the center of power, such as Xi Zhongxun (father of Xi Jinping and a member of the party's Central Secretariat), Wan Li (a vice premier credited with launching the agricultural reforms when he was party chief of Anhui province at the end of the 1970s), and provincial party chiefs in Guangdong and Fujian. The most vocal group of supporters of the liberals was made up of the intelligentsia. This group was extremely valuable to the liberals because they could provide ideas for reform and expose the ideological bankruptcy of the conservatives. However, the intelligentsia had no real political power and could, from time to time, create problems for the liberals in the party when they pushed too hard for political change.

自由派的政治支持来源多种多样。在党内，他们可以依靠少数身居要职的（影响力较小的）革命老将，例如习仲勋（习近平之父，中共中央书记处成员）、万力（曾任安徽省委书记，在20世纪70年代末期启动农业改革，被誉为副总理），以及广东和福建两省的省委书记。自由派最积极的支持者是知识分子。知识分子对自由派来说极其重要，因为他们能够提供改革思路，并揭露保守派的意识形态破产。然而，知识分子本身并没有实权，而且有时，当他们过于积极地推动政治变革时，也会给党内的自由派制造麻烦。

The greatest weakness of the liberals is that they relied almost exclusively on Deng's support for their effectiveness and survival. If Deng sided with the liberals on economic reform, they could overcome the opposition from the conservatives. But when Deng threw his weight behind the conservatives in cracking down on "bourgeois liberalization" in 1987, the liberals were sure to lose (as in the downfall of Hu Yaobang in 1987 and the Tiananmen crisis in 1989). The liberals also likely underappreciated Deng's ruthlessness and unreliability at the most crucial junctures. To Deng, the liberal reformers were useful but ultimately dispensable. He needed them to fight the conservative opposition to pro-market reforms and an opening to the West. But Deng's support for them had a bottom line: When they defied him on the most important issue of preserving monopoly rule by the party, he would not hesitate to cast them aside.

自由派最大的弱点在于，他们的效力和生存几乎完全依赖于邓小平的支持。如果邓小平在经济改革问题上支持自由派，他们就能克服保守派的反对。但当邓小平在1987年全力支持保守派镇压“资产阶级自由化”时，自由派注定会失败（正如1987年胡耀邦的下台和1989年的天安门事件所表明的那样）。自由派可能也低估了邓小平在关键时刻的冷酷无情和不可靠。对邓小平而言，自由派改革者虽然有用，但最终是可有可无的。他需要他们来对抗保守派反对市场改革和对外开放。但邓小平对他们的支持是有底线的：当他们在维护党的垄断统治这一最重要的问题上违抗他的命令时，他会毫不犹豫地抛弃他们。

The unfavorable balance of power among the conservatives, centrists, and liberals shaped the outcomes of the key battles over economic and political reform in the 1980s. Out of necessity, Deng had to rely on the liberal wing of the party to overcome conservative opposition to his economic reform agenda. As a result, he could form a winning coalition with the liberals in most battles over economic policy. At the same time, however, to defend against any threats to party rule, Deng consistently banded together with the hard-liners in lashing out against liberalizing trends and prodemocracy forces. Put another way, the differences between Deng and Chen were tactical, not fundamental. Both were determined to preserve one-party rule, but Deng believed that pro-market reform and opening to the West could better serve this ultimate objective than the closed command economy that Chen advocated. Obviously, post-Mao history vindicated Deng. Nevertheless, the differences between Deng and the liberals were fundamental and irreconcilable. The objective of the liberals was to build both a market economy and a political system in which party power would be curtailed by rule of law and would be withdrawn from the state. (Even though the liberal intelligentsia advocated a multiparty democracy, few liberal leaders, least of all Hu Yaobang and Zhao Ziyang, envisioned any replacement of CCP rule with a competitive democracy.) In retrospect, the fundamental agreement between the hard-liners and Deng made it inconceivable that the liberals, the weakest of the political forces in the party, could have prevailed in the most crucial battles over the direction of reform in the 1980s, such as the handling of the prodemocracy movements at the end of 1986 and during the Tiananmen protest movement in April and May of 1989.

20世纪80年代，保守派、中间派和自由派之间权力失衡，决定了经济和政治改革关键斗争的走向。邓小平迫于无奈，不得不依靠党内的自由派来克服保守派对其经济改革议程的反对。因此，在大多数经济政策斗争中，他都能与自由派结成制胜联盟。然而，与此同时，为了捍卫党的统治，邓小平始终与强硬派结盟，共同打击自由化趋势和民主力量。换言之，邓小平与陈德贤之间的分歧是策略性的，而非根本性的。两人都决心维护一党专政，但邓小平认为，比起陈德贤所倡导的封闭式计划经济，市场改革和对外开放更能服务于这一最终目标。显然，后毛泽东时代的历史证明了邓小平的正确性。尽管如此，邓小平与自由派之间的分歧却是根本性的，且无法调和。自由派的目标是建立市场经济和政治体制，在这个体制下，党的权力将受到法治的制约，并最终脱离国家控制。（尽管自由派知识分子倡导多党民主制，但鲜有自由派领导人，尤其是胡耀邦和赵紫阳，设想用竞争性民主取代中共统治。）事后看来，强硬派与邓小平之间的根本共识使得人们难以想象，作为党内最弱小的政治力量的自由派，能够在20世纪80年代关于改革方向的最关键斗争中取得胜利，例如1986年底对民主运动的处理，以及1989年4月和5月的天安门抗议运动。





Institutionalizing Elite Politics





精英政治的制度化


High on the agenda of the grand coalition in the early 1980s was the implementation of institutional reforms to protect the party from the rise of another Mao-like figure and to reinvigorate party leadership. Deng initially summarized the overall framework for these reforms in a landmark speech at an enlarged Politburo meeting in August 1980.10 Considered the most open-minded and searing diagnosis of the pathologies in China's political system, this speech laid out a set of measures to mitigate these flaws. From Deng's perspective, the most serious institutional flaws in the Chinese party-state and their manifestations included the "overconcentration of power, patriarchal methods, life tenure in leading posts, and privileges of various kinds."11 Deng also decried "feudalism" (which really meant an autocratic mindset) and the phenomenon of "paternalism," which he defined as a form of despotism that led to the dominance of the individual over the party organization. Most likely Deng had Mao in mind because he blamed "paternalism" for the egregious harm that had been inflicted on the party.

20世纪80年代初，大联合政府的首要议程之一是推行体制改革，以防止党内出现另一个毛泽东式人物，并重振党的领导力量。邓小平在1980年8月的一次扩大政治局会议上发表了具有里程碑意义的讲话，首次概述了这些改革的总体框架。这篇讲话被认为是迄今为止对中国政治体制弊病最开明、最深刻的诊断，并提出了一系列旨在缓解这些缺陷的措施。在邓小平看来，中国党国体制中最严重的制度缺陷及其表现形式包括“权力过度集中、家长式作风、领导职位终身制以及各种特权”。邓小平还谴责“封建主义”（实际上是指专制思想）和“家长式作风”现象，他将“家长式作风”定义为一种专制形式，导致个人凌驾于党组织之上。邓小平很可能指的是毛泽东，因为他将党遭受的严重损害归咎于“家长式作风”。

Reforms to address these flaws, according to Deng, should include collective leadership, which meant the party chief would have to share decision-making authority with his colleagues. Another solution was to abolish lifetime tenure of cadres and to make improvements in the selection, appointment, evaluation, transfer, and dismissal of cadres. Intriguingly, although Deng said that reform of the political system could provide institutional safeguards for "democratization" of the political life of the party and the state, he stopped well short of calling for democratic reforms. Instead, he merely said that research and investigation were needed to learn from other countries' experiences and to produce practical plans. To underscore his belief in the centrality of the party-state, Deng said that "the reform of the system of party and state leadership is precisely to maintain and further strengthen party leadership and discipline, and not to weaken or relax them," because "without such a party, our country will split up and accomplish nothing."12

邓小平认为，为解决这些缺陷，改革应包括集体领导，这意味着党的领导人必须与同事分享决策权。另一个解决方案是废除干部的终身制，并改进干部的选拔、任命、考核、调动和解职制度。耐人寻味的是，尽管邓小平表示政治体制改革可以为党和国家政治生活的“民主化”提供制度保障，但他并未直接呼吁进行民主改革。相反，他只是说需要进行研究和调查，借鉴其他国家的经验，并制定切实可行的方案。为了强调他对党国中心地位的信念，邓小平指出，“党和国家领导体制改革正是为了维护和加强党的领导和纪律，而不是削弱或放松它们”，因为“没有这样的党，我们的国家就会分裂，一事无成”。

If anything, this speech revealed the limitations of Deng's vision of political reform. To be sure, he correctly identified the most serious symptoms of the pathologies of the Chinese political system. But the immediate solutions he proposed—abolishing lifetime tenure and improving the cadre management system—were purely technical or organizational. He focused almost exclusively on how to address the problems within the party but did not show much interest in dealing with the problems between the party-state and Chinese society caused by the lack of rule of law and democracy. Neither did he have a clear idea about how to establish enforceable mechanisms within the party to mitigate the overconcentration of power, feudalism, and paternalism. Most critically, by cautioning against reforms that would undermine the party's political monopoly, Deng effectively ruled out the empowerment of Chinese society or the establishment of rule of law as potential autonomous forces that could safeguard the new institutional rules and norms.

如果说这次讲话有什么意义的话，那就是它暴露了邓小平政治改革理念的局限性。诚然，他正确地指出了中国政治体制弊病中最严重的症状。但他提出的直接解决方案——废除终身制和改进干部管理制度——纯粹是技术性的或组织性的。他几乎完全专注于如何解决党内问题，却对因缺乏法治和民主而导致的党国与中国社会之间的矛盾漠不关心。他也没有清晰的思路，如何在党内建立可执行的机制来缓解权力过度集中、封建主义和家长式作风等问题。最关键的是，邓小平警告不要进行任何会削弱党的政治垄断的改革，这实际上排除了赋予中国社会权力或建立法治作为维护新制度规则和规范的潜在自主力量的可能性。

Such inherent limitations and contradictions notwithstanding, Deng's call for establishing the principle of collective leadership, norms of political conduct within the party, and formal rules on retirement age and term limits resonated with conservatives and liberals alike. As victims of Mao's tyrannical rule, they had no disagreement on the need to implement reforms to bring more stability and predictability into the inner workings of the party as an organization.

尽管存在这些固有的局限性和矛盾，邓小平关于建立集体领导原则、制定党内政治行为规范以及正式规定退休年龄和任期限制的呼吁，引起了保守派和自由派的共同共鸣。作为毛泽东专制统治的受害者，他们对需要进行改革以增强党组织内部运作的稳定性和可预测性这一点并无异议。

Thanks to the consensus within the party on collective leadership, security of elites, and rules on age and term limits, the post-Mao leadership quickly passed several historic documents that constituted the CCP's most serious effort to institutionalize. As we will see, however, these institutional reforms had severe limitations because Deng and the veteran revolutionaries did not observe them. Most key provisions were deliberately vague so as to grant top leaders sufficient discretion. Institutional reforms to separate the party from the state, which Deng sanctioned in late 1986, were doomed from the start because he was adamantly opposed to any reform that could weaken the party's power and result in some form of checks and balances. Taken together, the institutional reforms of the party-state in the 1980s were administrative in nature and largely superficial. They did not touch on the defining feature of a totalitarian regime: dominance and control of the state apparatus by the party. Consequently, instead of a transition from totalitarian to authoritarian rule, the institutional reforms of the party-state in the 1980s succeeded in preserving the core of a totalitarian regime.

由于党内就集体领导、精英安全以及年龄和任期限制等问题达成共识，后毛泽东时代的领导层迅速通过了一系列历史性文件，这构成了中共制度化进程中最严肃的一次尝试。然而，正如我们将看到的，这些制度改革存在严重的局限性，因为邓小平和老革命家们并未遵守这些改革。大多数关键条款都故意含糊不清，以赋予最高领导人足够的自由裁量权。邓小平在1986年末批准的旨在将党与国家分离的制度改革从一开始就注定失败，因为他坚决反对任何可能削弱党的权力并导致某种形式的权力制衡的改革。总而言之，20世纪80年代的党国制度改革本质上是行政性的，而且大多流于表面。它们没有触及极权政权的本质特征：党对国家机器的支配和控制。因此，20 世纪 80 年代党国体制改革并没有使国家从极权统治过渡到威权统治，反而成功地保留了极权政权的核心。

The party laid out its most important principles and norms in a key document, "Guiding Principles for Inner-Party Political Life," in February 1980.13 Besides reiterating the sacrosanct principle of loyalty to the party, this Central Committee document emphasized collective leadership and decreed "personal arbitrary decision-making," obviously a veiled reference to Mao's personalistic rule. Thus it specified that all key decisions were to be discussed and approved by the party committee or standing committee at each level, and not by an individual—a provision Deng himself honored only in the breach. The resolution explicitly banned activities or rituals that could promote a "personality cult."

1980年2月，党在一份重要文件《党内政治生活指导原则》中阐述了其最重要的原则和规范。除了重申对党忠诚这一神圣原则外，这份中央委员会文件还强调集体领导，并规定禁止“个人任意决策”，这显然是在暗指毛泽东的个人主义统治。因此，文件明确规定所有重大决策都必须由各级党委或常委讨论和批准，而不是由个人做出——邓小平本人也只是偶尔违背这一规定。该决议明确禁止任何可能助长“个人崇拜”的活动或仪式。

The document encouraged "democracy in the party" and called on the party to "correctly treat different views." It expressly prohibited the practice of exaggerating party members' mistakes or persecuting them under false pretenses. Party members had the right to participate in discussions of party policies (but only at meetings organized by the party or in party publications). They could make appeals and presentations to superior party organizations on disciplinary decisions related to themselves or other people.

该文件鼓励“党内民主”，并呼吁党“正确对待不同意见”。它明确禁止夸大党员的错误或以莫须有的罪名迫害党员。党员有权参与党的政策讨论（但只能在党组织的会议或党刊上进行）。他们可以就涉及自身或他人的纪律处分向上级党组织提出申诉和陈述。

In practical terms, perhaps the most important reform the party adopted in the early 1980s was the mandatory age limit for most party and government officials and term limits for top government positions. The party had urgent reason to persuade a large group of aging revolutionary veterans (roughly 2.5 million) to vacate their leadership positions to make way for younger and better-educated people. More important, the institution of mandatory retirement and term limits would also improve predictability of promotion and elite circulation, retain the loyalty of ambitious younger elites, and ensure vigor among the ruling elites.14 In the party's February 1982 decision on establishing a retirement system for "veteran cadres," the retirement age limit of ministers, provincial party chiefs and governors, and heads of provincial high courts and procuratorates was set at 65. Their deputies were required to retire at age 60. Officials at the rank of director general (bureau-level) were not to serve beyond 60 under normal circumstances.15 When the Chinese constitution was overhauled in 1982, it also instituted a two-term limit for the presidency (a largely symbolic position) and for the premier.

实际上，该党在20世纪80年代初推行的最重要的改革或许是对大多数党政官员实行强制性年龄限制，并对高级政府职位实行任期限制。该党迫切需要说服一大批年迈的革命老兵（约250万人）卸任领导职务，以便为更年轻、受过更好教育的人腾出位置。更重要的是，强制退休和任期限制制度还能提高晋升和精英轮换的可预测性，留住有抱负的年轻精英，并确保执政精英的活力。14 在1982年2月党关于建立“老干部”退休制度的决定中，部长、省委书记、省长、省高级法院院长和检察院院长的退休年龄被设定为65岁。他们的副手必须在60岁退休。局长级官员在正常情况下不得超过60岁。15 1982年中国宪法修订时，也规定了国家主席（一个很大程度上具有象征意义的职位）和总理的任期限制为两届。

Although the institutional reforms in the early 1980s constituted a real and positive step toward making political life within the party-state less brutal and less arbitrary, they had serious limitations. In terms of age and term limits, it is notable that Deng and his colleagues deliberately exempted the most senior leaders. For instance, such limits were not imposed on members of the Central Committee, the Politburo, the PSC, or the chair of the CMC. This omission, as we will see later, was to have profound—and negative—consequences during the remainder of the post-Mao period. Another noteworthy loophole in the mandatory retirement system was that the age limit could be waived if continuing service by the official was "needed."

尽管20世纪80年代初的体制改革是朝着使党国政治生活不那么残酷、不那么专断迈出的切实而积极的一步，但这些改革也存在严重的局限性。在年龄和任期限制方面，值得注意的是，邓小平及其同僚有意豁免了最高级别的领导人。例如，中央委员会委员、政治局委员、国家公共安全委员会委员以及中央军委主席等均不受此类限制。正如我们稍后将看到的，这一疏漏在后毛泽东时代产生了深远的负面影响。强制退休制度的另一个值得注意的漏洞是，如果官员“需要”继续任职，则可以豁免其年龄限制。

The most critical flaw of all the institutional reforms, whether in terms of the political norms within the party or the age and term limits, is the lack of credible enforcement mechanisms. For any rules or norms to be binding, the most effective institutional arrangement is the designation of a third party, in this case an organization independent of the CCP, to enforce them. However, none of the reforms implemented in the early 1980s contained provisions on third-party enforcement. Instructively, when the National People's Congress (NPC) was discussing a major overhaul of the constitution between September 1980 and October 1982, a key issue was whether to establish an institution to ensure compliance with the constitution. One proposal was to form a specialized constitutional committee within the NPC. However, Deng vetoed the idea. As a result, the Chinese constitution has no provisions for ensuring compliance.16

所有制度改革，无论是党内政治规范还是年龄和任期限制，其最关键的缺陷在于缺乏可信的执行机制。任何规则或规范要具有约束力，最有效的制度安排是指定第三方（在本例中为独立于中共的组织）来执行。然而，20世纪80年代初实施的所有改革均未包含关于第三方执行的规定。值得注意的是，1980年9月至1982年10月全国人民代表大会讨论对宪法进行重大修订时，一个关键问题是是否设立一个机构来确保宪法得到遵守。其中一项提议是在全国人大内部设立一个专门的宪法委员会。然而，邓小平否决了这一提议。因此，中国宪法没有关于确保宪法得到遵守的规定。

Two factors lay behind the limitations of the institutional reforms undertaken by the CCP in the early 1980s. Politically, Deng and the other aging leaders did not want to be bound by any rules in their own exercise of power. They not only wielded power behind the scenes but also openly violated the key provisions laid out in the "Guiding Principles for Inner-Party Political Life." For example, instead of convening meetings of the PSC, Deng spoke directly to key leaders to issue instructions, thus bypassing his archrival, Chen Yun. Important personnel decisions were made by party elders, not by the general secretary. Zhao Ziyang revealed that "leaders at my level could not make important personnel decisions. That was true when Yaobang was the general secretary. Sometimes we did not even have the opportunity to participate in discussing such decisions. Only a small number of elders were consulted. Such decisions could be made only when Xiaoping and Chen Yun reached an agreement between them.17 Even though the guiding principles ostensibly permitted party members to voice different opinions and prohibited their persecution, after the start of the anti-bourgeois liberalization campaign in January 1987, Deng himself named several liberal party members who would be slated for punishment. It was only stalling by Zhao that allowed most of the people on Deng's list to be saved.18

中共在20世纪80年代初推行的体制改革存在局限性，其背后有两个因素。在政治上，邓小平和其他老一辈领导人不愿在行使权力时受到任何规则的约束。他们不仅在幕后操纵权力，还公开违反了《党内政治生活指导原则》中的关键规定。例如，邓小平不召开党政委会议，而是直接向关键领导人下达指示，从而绕过了他的宿敌陈云。重要的人事决策也由党内元老而非总书记做出。赵紫阳透露：“我们这个级别的领导不能做重要的人事决定。姚邦当总书记的时候就是这样。有时候我们甚至没有机会参与讨论这类决定，只有少数元老才能参与。这类决定只有在小平、陈云达成一致后才能做出。”尽管指导原则表面上允许党员发表不同意见，禁止迫害，但在1987年1月反资产阶级自由化运动开始后，邓小平本人也点名批评了几位自由派党员。多亏赵紫阳的拖延，邓小平名单上的大多数人才得以幸免。

An even more critical factor is the impossibility of enforcing any rules and norms in an autocracy. As many theorists have noted, institutions function only when the rulers' commitments to uphold them are enforceable.19 Normally, the most effective mechanisms of enforcement are those that rely on third parties, such as independent courts, a free press, and civil society. Such third-party enforcers do not exist in autocratic regimes. Counting on autocrats to self-enforce their commitments is unreliable because the temptations to gain political advantage and power by violating the rules and norms are often too great to resist. Rules and norms may be enforceable in an autocracy only when the balance of power is equally distributed among dueling factions, making it costly for any one faction to violate them.

更为关键的因素在于，在专制政体中，任何规则和规范都无法得到有效执行。正如许多理论家所指出的，只有当统治者履行其维护制度的承诺能够得到执行时，制度才能发挥作用。通常，最有效的执行机制依赖于第三方，例如独立的法院、新闻自由和公民社会。然而，在专制政体中，这些第三方执行者并不存在。指望专制者自我约束、履行承诺是不可靠的，因为通过违反规则和规范来获取政治利益和权力的诱惑往往难以抵挡。只有当权力在相互对立的派系之间势均力敌，使得任何一个派系都难以承受违反规则和规范的代价时，规则和规范才有可能在专制政体中得到有效执行。

In the Chinese case, due to Deng's determination to suppress prodemocracy forces that could undermine the party's monopoly of power, it was impossible for third parties to emerge and help enforce the very rules and norms that Deng thought would help make political life inside the CCP more stable and predictable. The contradictions between Deng's goals of institutionalizing the CCP and his aversion to any reforms that might weaken CCP power ultimately would render his reforms partial, ineffective, and short-lived.

在中国，由于邓小平决心压制可能动摇党的权力垄断地位的民主力量，第三方政党根本无法出现，也就无法帮助维护邓小平认为有助于中共内部政治生活更加稳定和可预测的规则和规范。邓小平致力于将中共制度化的目标与他反对任何可能削弱中共权力的改革之间的矛盾，最终导致他的改革是局部性的、无效的，并且昙花一现。





Clashing Visions of Economic Reform





经济改革的不同愿景


Two fundamentally different visions of the future of the Chinese economy divided the conservatives, led by Chen Yun, and the Deng-liberal coalition. The reform agenda of the latter emphasized opening to the outside world and implementing market reforms, while the conservatives tried to preserve the command economy that had been established in the 1950s and maintained a skeptical attitude toward market reforms and integration with the West-dominated global economy.20 In terms of policy, the two groups differed on the pace and scope of rural reform, domestic economic liberalization (such as development of a private sector), and economic growth rates.21 Chen and Deng also disagreed on foreign policy (Chen liked the Soviet Union and did not trust the United States, whereas Deng favored good ties with the United States and took a hard line toward the Soviet Union).22

对中国经济未来截然不同的两种愿景，将以陈云为首的保守派与邓小平领导的自由派联盟分裂开来。后者强调对外开放和市场改革，而保守派则试图维护20世纪50年代建立的计划经济体制，并对市场改革和融入西方主导的全球经济持怀疑态度。在政策方面，两派在农村改革的速度和范围、国内经济自由化（例如发展私营部门）以及经济增长速度等方面存在分歧。陈云和邓小平在外交政策上也存在分歧（陈云亲苏，不信任美国；而邓小平则主张与美国保持良好关系，对苏联采取强硬立场）。

Ideologically, Chen consistently advocated that central planning must determine economic activities, with the market playing only a secondary role. To use his famous analogy, the planned economy was the cage and the market was the bird living inside the cage. The market could operate freely—but only within the confines of the planned economy.23 In contrast, Deng and the liberals saw a market-oriented economy as China's future.24

在思想上，陈一鸣始终主张中央计划经济必须主导经济活动，市场只能扮演辅助角色。他曾用一个著名的比喻来形容计划经济：计划经济是笼子，市场是笼中鸟。市场可以自由运作，但只能在计划经济的框架内进行。与此相反，邓小平和自由派人士则认为市场经济才是中国的未来。

At the beginning of the 1980s, Chen's opposition to the economic reforms was more measured, even nuanced. As a fiscal hawk who preferred lower growth to deficit-spending, he repeatedly gave speeches affirming the dominant role of the planned economy, urging fiscal conservatism, and cautioning against hasty reforms.25 But on occasion, he would show support for Zhao's reformist policies. Nevertheless, despite the early achievements of the economic reforms, Chen continued to insist on maintaining the dominant role of planning. Consequently, his opposition to the economic reforms—and his policy differences with the reformers—intensified.26

20世纪80年代初，陈对经济改革的反对态度更为谨慎，甚至有些微妙。作为一位财政鹰派，他倾向于低增长而非赤字支出，多次发表讲话，重申计划经济的主导地位，敦促财政保守主义，并告诫不要仓促改革。但有时，他也会表示支持赵的改革政策。然而，尽管经济改革初期取得了一些成就，陈仍然坚持维持计划经济的主导地位。因此，他对经济改革的反对——以及他与改革派的政策分歧——愈演愈烈。

The area where Deng and Chen diverged and clashed the most was opening China to the capitalist West. As opening was key to the success of the domestic reforms, Deng strongly advocated policies welcoming foreign investment. He enthusiastically supported the proposal to establish special economic zones (SEZs) in Guangdong and Fujian in April 1979, and within a year he fast-tracked a package of policies granting Shenzhen, Xiamen, Shantou, and Zhu-hai autonomy to attract foreign investment and trade.27 In 1984 he visited some of the SEZs to show his support. As Deng said to Zhao and Hu in February 1982, "The SEZs are a window through which [we can] bring in technology, management, and knowledge."28 In October 1984 Deng countered the conservatives' criticisms of his policy of opening, declaring, "Some of our comrades are always worried that if we open up, undesirable things may be brought into China. Above all, they worry that the country might go capitalist.... Of course, some negative elements will come in, and we must be aware of that. But it will not be difficult for us to overcome them.... If we isolate ourselves and close our doors again, it will be absolutely impossible for us to approach the level of the developed countries in fifty years."29 Although Deng did not name Chen, he most likely was referring to him.

邓小平和陈德贤分歧和冲突最大的领域是向西方资本主义开放中国。由于开放是国内改革成功的关键，邓小平大力倡导欢迎外资的政策。1979年4月，他热情支持在广东和福建设立经济特区的提议，并在一年内迅速出台一系列政策，赋予深圳、厦门、汕头和珠海吸引外资和贸易的自主权。1984年，他亲自考察了部分经济特区，以示支持。正如邓小平在1982年2月对赵立坚和胡锦涛所说：“经济特区是引进技术、管理和知识的窗口。”28 1984年10月，邓小平反驳了保守派对其改革开放政策的批评，他宣称：“我们的一些同志总是担心，如果我们开放，不好的东西就会被引进中国。他们最担心的是，国家会走向资本主义……当然，会有一些负面因素进来，我们必须意识到这一点。但是，克服这些因素并不难……如果我们再次封闭自己，关闭国门，五十年内绝对不可能赶上发达国家的水平。”29 虽然邓小平没有点名陈，但他很可能指的是陈。

On the issue of opening, as Zhao observed, Chen Yun "was completely at odds with [Deng] Xiaoping. . . . Chen Yun was very cautious about foreign investments. The case file for the Shanghai-Volkswagen joint venture remained in his office for a long time before he finally gave his consent.30 As reflected in his speeches on foreign trade and investment, Chen was consistently skeptical about, if not hostile to, the idea of economic engagement with the capitalist West. In December 1980 he opposed borrowing from the West or from the World Bank to finance imports of capital goods, and he called for "vigilance in welcoming foreign capitalists." On foreign trade, Chen had a zero-sum mindset, continuing to worry that competition among Chinese exporters would allow foreign trade partners to benefit. He therefore advocated retreating to a centralized foreign trade system to avoid "losses." Chen was especially skeptical about the SEZs. In 1982 he warned that if more SEZs were allowed, "foreign capitalists and domestic speculators will come out in droves, and speculation will be rampant. That must not be allowed."31 Instead of promoting the SEZs, Chen urged a pause and, to show his opposition, never set foot in any of the SEZs. In all likelihood, Chen's opposition to opening arose from his fears of the ideological influence of the West, not just its economic clout. He called on the party to "pay attention to the negative things brought in by opening to the outside." In particular he worried that exposure to the developed capitalist West could lead people to believe that socialism is inferior to capitalism.32

正如赵所观察到的，在对外开放问题上，陈云“与邓小平完全对立……陈云对外国投资非常谨慎。上海大众合资企业的案卷在他办公室搁置了很久，他才最终同意。”正如他在对外贸易和投资方面的讲话所反映的那样，陈云始终对与西方资本主义国家进行经济接触持怀疑态度，甚至可以说是敌视。1980年12月，他反对向西方或世界银行借款来资助资本货物进口，并呼吁“警惕外国资本家”。在对外贸易问题上，陈云持有零和博弈的思维模式，他始终担心中国出口商之间的竞争会让外国贸易伙伴从中获利。因此，他主张回归集中式的对外贸易体制，以避免“损失”。陈云尤其对经济特区持怀疑态度。1982年，他警告说，如果允许设立更多经济特区，“外国资本家和国内投机者”将会有大量人员涌入，投机活动也会猖獗。这绝不能允许。”31 陈没有推动经济特区建设，而是敦促暂停，并且为了表示反对，他从未踏足过任何经济特区。很可能，陈反对对外开放的根源在于他对西方意识形态影响的担忧，而不仅仅是其经济实力。他呼吁党“关注对外开放带来的负面影响”。他尤其担心，接触发达的资本主义西方可能会使人们认为社会主义不如资本主义。32

Yet, despite Chen's consistent opposition to market reforms, he was constantly outmaneuvered by Deng and the liberals in the early 1980s because Zhao Ziyang was in direct charge of economic policy at the State Council and generally implemented Deng's policies, even though he would also consult with Chen out of deference.33 Because of their sharp differences over the economic reforms, Deng developed a strategy to undercut Chen's role in economic policy making. He rarely held PSC meetings (which would have given Chen an opportunity to present his opposing views and potentially to force Deng to water down his reformist policies). Instead, Deng would approach Zhao and Hu Yaobang directly and give them instructions. At one point, a frustrated Chen asked Zhao why no PSC meetings were being held. Zhao, then serving as CCP acting general secretary, replied "I am only a big secretary. If you want to have meetings, you should first reach an agreement with Comrade Xiaoping."34

然而，尽管陈志远一贯反对市场改革，但在20世纪80年代初，他却屡屡被邓小平及其自由派人士牵着鼻子走，因为赵紫阳在国务院直接负责经济政策，并总体上执行邓小平的政策，即便出于尊重，他也会与陈志远商议。由于两人在经济改革问题上存在严重分歧，邓小平制定了一项削弱陈志远在经济政策制定中作用的策略。他很少召开国务院政治局常委会会议（这本应让陈志远有机会表达反对意见，并有可能迫使邓小平淡化其改革政策）。相反，邓小平会直接与赵紫阳和胡耀邦沟通，并向他们下达指示。有一次，沮丧的陈志远问赵紫阳为何不召开国务院政治局常委会会议。时任中共代总书记的赵紫阳回答说：“我只是个大书记。如果你想开会，应该先和肖平同志达成一致。”





Partial Political Reforms





部分政治改革


In addition to the institutional reforms focusing on party leadership, Deng also promoted two important reforms to modernize the legal system and restore the function of the NPC. He supported these reforms not because he intended to promote the rule of law and multiparty democracy but because he saw instrumental value in them. Specifically, restoring the legislative function of the NPC could give party policies a veneer of popular and procedural legitimacy. After all, CCP Central Committee resolutions were, strictly speaking, documents issued by a political party that lacked the same legal force as the national legislature. Much dearer to Deng's heart was the use of law to create a friendlier legal environment to attract foreign investment.

除了着重于党的领导层改革之外，邓小平还推动了两项重要改革，即法律体系现代化和恢复全国人大职能。他支持这些改革并非出于推进法治和多党民主的目的，而是因为他看到了这些改革的工具性价值。具体而言，恢复全国人大立法职能可以赋予党的政策以民意和程序上的合法性。毕竟，严格来说，中共中央决议是由一个政党发布的，并不具备全国人大的法律效力。邓小平更看重的是利用法律创造一个更有利于吸引外资的法律环境。

Therefore, from the very beginning, party efforts to introduce legal reforms were focused on passage of the essential commercial laws that underpinned a market economy, such as a contract law, foreign investment law, and company law.35 Additionally, the legal profession, abolished during the Maoist era, was rebuilt. Law schools were reopened to train legal professionals. Courts and procuratorates, previously heavily staffed by discharged military officers with little legal training, were gradually filled with more qualified personnel. Citizens enjoyed better legal protections as the state was forced to observe some form of legal procedures.36 Despite progress toward establishing a modern legal system, the party-sanctioned legal reforms in the 1980s were inherently limited. The supremacy of the CCP meant that the party continued to remain above the law and maintained tight control over the courts and procuratorates. Protection of human rights and property rights was spotty. Fragmented authoritarianism, a unique feature of the Chinese regime, meant that the implementation of law and the enforceability of judgments could not be ensured at local levels or across different jurisdictions.37 To be sure, the reforms that took place in the legal arena during the 1980s marked a significant improvement over the lawlessness of the Mao era, but they made only modest progress toward establishing rule of law.38

因此，从一开始，党推行法律改革的努力就集中在通过支撑市场经济的基本商法，例如合同法、外商投资法和公司法。此外，在毛泽东时代被废除的法律职业也得以重建。法学院重新开放，以培养法律专业人才。此前主要由缺乏法律培训的退伍军官组成的法院和检察机关，也逐渐配备了更多合格的人员。由于国家被迫遵守某种形式的法律程序，公民享有更好的法律保护。尽管在建立现代法律体系方面取得了进展，但20世纪80年代党推行的法律改革本质上是有限的。中共的至高无上地位意味着党仍然凌驾于法律之上，并对法院和检察机关保持着严格的控制。人权和财产权的保护并不完善。中国政权的独特之处在于其碎片化的威权主义，这意味着法律的实施和判决的执行无法在地方层面或不同司法管辖区得到保障。诚然，20世纪80年代法律领域的改革相比毛泽东时代的无法无天有了显著改善，但在建立法治方面进展甚微。

In addition to these legal reforms, the party also gave the NPC a more prominent procedural role in policymaking. Institutionally, the NPC was strengthened by the formation of specialized committees, the establishment of formal legislative procedures, and the recruitment of a more professional staff. Politically, the NPC gained status with the appointment of heavyweight political figures as chairs of its Standing Committee. On occasion, delegates to the annual NPC sessions could voice their views on public policy and even register symbolic disapproval of government performance with "no" votes or abstentions to the work reports of the premier and the presidents of the People's Supreme Court and the People's Supreme Procuratorate. Similar institutional developments, albeit to a lesser degree, also occurred at the local levels.39 Although these modest reforms made the NPC a more important actor in Chinese politics, they fell far short of establishing functional constraints on the power of the party, which controlled all key appointments to the NPC, set its legislative agenda, and used it mainly as an instrument to legitimize its policies.

除了这些法律改革之外，党还赋予全国人大在政策制定中更为突出的程序性作用。在制度上，全国人大通过设立专门委员会、建立正式的立法程序以及招募更多专业人员而得到加强。在政治上，全国人大通过任命重量级政治人物担任常务委员会主席而提升了其地位。在全国人大年会上，代表们有时可以就公共政策发表意见，甚至可以通过对总理、最高人民法院院长和最高人民检察院院长的工作报告投反对票或弃权票来象征性地表达对政府工作的不满。尽管程度较轻，但类似的制度发展也发生在地方层面。尽管这些温和的改革使全国人大在中国政治中扮演了更重要的角色，但它们远未对党的权力建立起有效的制约。党控制着全国人大的所有关键任命，制定了全国人大立法议程，并主要将其作为使其政策合法化的工具。





Attempt at Comprehensive Political Reform, 1986-1987





1986-1987年全面政治改革尝试


If there were one brief window of opportunity for the party to implement genuine political reforms to dismantle its totalitarian institutional foundations, it was an attempt undertaken by Zhao Ziyang in 1986-1987 with Deng's support. The paramount leader unexpectedly put political reform on the agenda in the summer of 1986 mainly because he was frustrated by the slow pace of reform in urban areas, which he attributed to obstruction by an inefficient party-dominated administrative apparatus, an assessment shared by Zhao as well.40 In June 1986 Deng told leading members of the Central Committee: "Early in 1980 it was suggested that we reform the political structure, but no concrete measures to do so were worked out. Now it is time for us to place political reform on the agenda . . . to create the necessary conditions for sustained economic growth," warning that "otherwise economic restructuring and economic growth will be retarded."41

如果说党曾有过一次短暂的良机，可以真正推行政治改革，拆除其极权主义的制度基础，那就是赵紫阳在1986-1987年间，在邓小平的支持下所做的尝试。这位最高领导人在1986年夏天出人意料地将政治改革提上日程，主要是因为他对城市改革进展缓慢感到失望，他认为这是由于效率低下的党控行政机构的阻挠造成的，赵紫阳也持相同看法。1986年6月，邓小平对中央委员会主要成员说：“1980年初就有人建议我们改革政治体制，但没有制定具体的措施。现在是时候把政治改革提上日程了……为经济持续增长创造必要条件。”他警告说，“否则经济结构调整和经济增长将会受阻。”

However, Deng's definition and objective of "political system reform" differed fundamentally from Zhao's. As Zhao pointed out, Deng's "political system reform was no more than a form of administrative reform." His idea of such a reform was not "real political modernization or democratization." As his goal of undertaking such reform was "to solidify further the CCP's one-party dictatorship," Deng resolutely rejected "any reform that could affect or weaken the CCP's one-party dictatorship."42 By contrast, Zhao believed that the ultimate objective of political system reform was to "change the party's complete monopoly of power . . . so as to establish gradually a democratic and accountable system with the CCP as the ruling party." (Zhao also believed that Hu Yaobang shared the same vision even though Hu had not said much about political reform publicly.)43 Even though Zhao's concept of political system reform fell short of full democratization, it was much more comprehensive and radical than anything Deng entertained. In Zhao's judgment, Deng's framing of political system reform represented a retreat from his famous speech of 1980 on the same subject because it narrowly confined reform to "separating the party from the government, decentralizing power, streamlining bureaucracy, and improving efficiency."44

然而，邓小平对“政治体制改革”的定义和目标与赵立坚的截然不同。正如赵立坚所指出的，邓小平的“政治体制改革不过是一种行政改革”。他所设想的改革并非“真正的政治现代化或民主化”。由于他推行此类改革的目标是“进一步巩固中共的一党专政”，邓小平坚决反对“任何可能影响或削弱中共一党专政的改革”。相比之下，赵立坚认为政治体制改革的最终目标是“改变党对权力的完全垄断……从而逐步建立以中共为执政党的民主问责制”。 （赵也认为胡耀邦与他有着相同的愿景，尽管胡耀邦很少公开谈论政治改革。）尽管赵的政治体制改革构想未能达到完全民主化，但它比邓小平的任何设想都更加全面和激进。在赵看来，邓小平对政治体制改革的阐述是对其1980年就同一主题发表的著名演讲的退缩，因为它将改革狭隘地局限于“党政分离、权力下放、精简机构、提高效率”。

Because Deng had lost trust in Hu Yaobang by the summer of 1986, he assigned Zhao the task of drawing up a comprehensive political system reform plan. In September Zhao formed a small group, innocuously called the "Central Research Small Group on Political System Reform," and chaired it himself. To carry out research and to draft the reform program, Zhao appointed his top aide, Bao Tong, to direct the special office supporting the "Small Group." Bao recruited a team of liberal intellectuals to staff this office.45

由于邓小平在1986年夏天对胡耀邦失去了信任，他指派赵承熙负责制定一套全面的政治体制改革方案。9月，赵承熙组建了一个小组，名为“中央政治体制改革研究小组”，并亲自担任组长。为了开展研究和起草改革方案，赵承熙任命他的得力助手包彤领导支持该小组的特别办公室。包彤招募了一批自由派知识分子来负责这个办公室的工作。

For the next twelve months, Bao's team labored in secrecy to produce a blueprint of a comprehensive reform that would be acceptable to Deng but would also accomplish Zhao's goal of introducing modest reforms that, in totality, could help the party-state make the transition from totalitarianism to authoritarianism. Despite Deng's restrictive remit, Zhao supported Bao's team in its exploration of a broad range of sensitive topics beyond the priorities laid out by Deng, in particular the "separation of the party from the government."

在接下来的十二个月里，鲍的团队秘密地制定了一份全面的改革方案，既要让邓小平接受，又要实现赵的目标，即推行适度的改革，最终帮助党国从极权主义过渡到威权主义。尽管邓小平的授权范围很窄，赵仍然支持鲍的团队探索邓小平设定的优先事项之外的一系列敏感议题，特别是“党政分离”问题。

Ironically, Zhao's group had more freedom than it appeared mainly because Deng did not define what he meant by "separating the party from the government." For example, the group determined that "the party's supervision of cadres" did not mean that the party should make specific appointments. Instead, a civil service system needed to be established as soon as possible, a first step toward extricating the party from the state.46 Besides defining the scope of "separating the party from the government" more broadly, Zhao's task force also veered off in more sensitive directions. It discussed how to institute "inner-party democracy," a topic not on Deng's list of reforms. In addition, the group explored the most sensitive issue of democratization by convening seminars on establishing channels through which various interest groups could engage in dialogue and consult with one another, and on the holding of competitive local elections to select delegates to local people's congresses.47

具有讽刺意味的是，赵的小组比表面看起来拥有更大的自由度，这主要是因为邓小平没有明确定义“党政分离”的含义。例如，该小组认为“党对干部的监督”并不意味着党应该进行具体的任命。相反，他们需要尽快建立公务员制度，这是党与国家分离的第一步。除了更广泛地界定“党政分离”的范围外，赵的特别工作组还转向了更为敏感的方向。他们讨论了如何建立“党内民主”，而这并非邓小平改革计划中的议题。此外，该小组还探讨了民主化中最敏感的问题，召开研讨会，讨论如何建立各利益集团之间进行对话和协商的渠道，以及如何举行竞争性的地方选举来选拔地方人民代表大会的代表。

After Zhao delivered to Deng the blueprint of the reform, titled "Overall Design for Political System Reform," in late May 1987, Deng immediately spotted the potential in the plan to establish mechanisms of checks and balances that could undermine the party's monopoly of power. Reiterating his opposition to a "separation of powers," Deng chided Zhao for "introducing some separation of powers," even though the plan did not explicitly state this concept. Deng again emphasized that the Chinese system was superior because it did not have to face interference from interest groups and because decisions made by the leaders could be implemented immediately. Deng warned that this superiority must not be abandoned just to appease "sentiments for democracy."48

1987年5月下旬，赵立坚向邓小平提交了题为《政治体制改革总体设计》的改革蓝图。邓小平立即意识到该方案中可能存在建立权力制衡机制的潜力，从而削弱党的权力垄断。邓小平重申了他反对“权力分立”的立场，并斥责赵立坚“引入某种权力分立”，尽管该方案并未明确提出这一概念。邓小平再次强调，中国体制的优势在于它不受利益集团的干预，领导人做出的决定可以立即执行。邓小平警告说，绝不能为了迎合“民主情绪”而放弃这一优势。

Deng's veiled but unmistakable criticism forced Zhao's group to scramble to revise the blueprint so that it could win his support. Two months later, Deng approved the revised draft of the "Overall Design"—but only after instructing Zhao to insert the following sentence: "[We] will never institute the Western practice of a tripartite separation of powers and rotation of powers among multiple parties."49 In September 1987 the Politburo approved the final draft of the Overall Design "in principle." But even Deng's support failed to produce a resounding endorsement by the party (most likely because Deng did not actively promote the plan). When Zhao tabled the Overall Design for discussion at a Central Committee meeting in mid-October 1987, many members expressed reservations or different views. As a result, he decided not to have the plenum vote on the document because he feared a potential setback. Instead of "approving" it, the plenum's communiqué stated that the Central Committee "discussed and agreed in principle with the 'Overall Design.'"50

邓小平含蓄却又明确的批评迫使赵立坚的团队紧急修改方案，以期获得他的支持。两个月后，邓小平批准了修改后的《总体设计》草案，但前提是他指示赵立坚在草案中加入以下句子：“我们绝不实行西方的三权分立和多党轮流执政。”1987年9月，政治局“原则上”批准了《总体设计》的最终草案。但即便有邓小平的支持，也未能获得党的广泛认可（很可能是因为邓小平没有积极推动该方案）。1987年10月中旬，赵立坚将《总体设计》提交中央委员会会议讨论时，许多委员表示保留意见或持有不同看法。因此，他担心可能遭遇挫折，决定不就该文件进行全会表决。全会公报并未“批准”该方案，而是指出中央委员会“讨论并原则上同意了‘总体设计’”。

The text of the Overall Design was never made public. Based on the recollections of one of the drafters, this document likely stated the guiding principles for political reform and established its objectives in general terms.51 After the Central Committee "agreed in principle" with the Overall Design in late October 1987, Zhao implemented several modest but substantive reforms. To promote inner-party democracy, he made the selection of members of the Central Committee at the Thirteenth Party Congress slightly more competitive. As a result, 185 candidates competed for the 175 slots on the committee. The archconservative Deng Liquun suffered a humiliating defeat when he was among the ten candidates who failed to get enough votes to serve. Competitive elections for provincial governors and the presidents of the provincial high courts and procuratorates were also introduced in some provinces, resulting in the defeat of a small number of CCP-nominated candidates.52

《总体设计》文本从未公开。根据一位起草者的回忆，这份文件很可能阐述了政治改革的指导原则，并概括地确立了改革目标。1987年10月下旬，中央委员会“原则上同意”《总体设计》后，赵立坚推行了几项虽不大但意义重大的改革。为了促进党内民主，他在十三大上略微提高了中央委员的选举竞争性。结果，185名候选人角逐175个中央委员席位。保守派的邓立群遭遇惨败，他是十名未能获得足够选票当选的候选人之一。一些省份也开始实行省长、省高级法院院长和省检察院院长的竞争性选举，导致少数中共提名的候选人落选。

In an attempt to institutionalize the decision-making process, the Politburo supported Zhao's proposal to regularize meetings of the party's Central Committee, Politburo, and the PSC (two plenums of the Central Committee per year; a monthly Politburo meeting; and a weekly PSC meeting). Additionally, again at Zhao's suggestion, the Politburo formalized the procedural rules for voting in the Politburo, the PSC, and the Central Secretariat, and it mandated that the decisions of each Central Committee plenum and every meeting of the Politburo be made public via the media. (Remarkably, the party still follows some of these rules established by Zhao.)53

为了使决策过程制度化，政治局支持赵立坚提出的将党的中央委员会、政治局和公共秘书处会议定期化的提议（中央委员会每年召开两次全会；政治局每月召开一次会议；公共秘书处每周召开一次会议）。此外，同样在赵立坚的建议下，政治局正式制定了政治局、公共秘书处和中央书记处的表决程序规则，并规定每次中央全会和每次政治局会议的决定都必须通过媒体公开。（值得注意的是，党至今仍在遵循赵立坚制定的一些规则。）

Unsurprisingly, the reform to "separate the party from the government" encountered strong opposition because it threatened both the power and the job security of a large number of apparatchiks. Nevertheless, local authorities began to carry out the leadership's guidelines on restructuring the party's role in government, such as reducing the number of party secretaries and full-time cadres and abolishing local party departments that were functionally redundant to their government counterparts. Zhao made only marginal progress in the central government. The party's "small groups" in finance, propaganda, foreign affairs, and political-legal work were kept intact, but they could no longer directly intervene or supervise the administrative tasks of the government. About half of the party groups in the State Council had been abolished by early 1989. Of all the measures to "separate the party from the government," the most important implemented by Zhao was abolition of the Central Political-Legal Committee, which oversaw law enforcement and the courts. To prevent this powerful body from interfering in the legal system, in 1988 Zhao downgraded it to a "small group." He also instituted an administrative leadership responsibility system by giving managers, presidents, and directors of state-owned enterprises (SOEs), universities, and public institutions sole administrative responsibilities, thus downsizing the role of the party chiefs.54

不出所料，“党政分离”改革遭遇了强烈反对，因为它威胁到了大量党员干部的权力和职位保障。尽管如此，地方政府还是开始执行中央关于调整党政角色的指示，例如减少党委书记和专职干部人数，以及撤销与中央政府职能重叠的地方党政部门。赵立坚在中央政府的改革进展甚微。党的财政、宣传、外交和政法等“小组”得以保留，但它们不再能够直接干预或监督政府的行政事务。到1989年初，国务院大约一半的党政小组已被撤销。在所有“党政分离”措施中，赵立坚实施的最重要的一项是撤销中央政法委员会，该委员会负责监督执法和法院运作。为了防止这个权力强大的机构干预司法系统，赵立坚在1988年将其降级为“小组”。他还建立了行政领导责任制，赋予国有企业、高校和公共机构的经理、总裁和董事单一的行政责任，从而削弱了党的领导作用。





Liberalization and Backlash





自由化与反弹


Between 1978 and the Tiananmen crackdown in June 1989, Chinese writers, artists, and intellectuals experienced freedom unprecedented in the post-1949 period, like their counterparts in the former Soviet bloc after the beginning of the "thaw" that followed Nikita Khrushchev's denunciation of Joseph Stalin in 1956. This wave of liberalization in the literary, artistic, and ideological spheres occurred mainly because of the spontaneous efforts of China's long-repressed writers, artists, and intellectuals to seek freedom of expression, expose unspeakable suffering and trauma of the Chinese people under the Maoist regime, and challenge orthodox Communist ideology. Importantly, liberal leaders, in particular Hu Yaobang, provided political protection and helped sustain liberalization despite constant conservative backlash.

从1978年到1989年6月天安门事件，中国作家、艺术家和知识分子经历了1949年以来前所未有的自由，如同前苏联集团国家在1956年赫鲁晓夫谴责斯大林后“解冻”时期所经历的那样。这场文学、艺术和思想领域的自由化浪潮，主要源于长期遭受压制的中国作家、艺术家和知识分子自发地争取言论自由，揭露毛泽东统治下中国人民难以言喻的苦难和创伤，并挑战正统的共产主义意识形态。尤其重要的是，自由派领导人，特别是胡耀邦，提供了政治保护，并在保守派的持续反扑下，帮助维持了自由化的进程。

The awakening of Chinese society in the post-Mao period began with the emergence and popularity of the so-called scar literature—short stories, novellas, plays, and films based on fictional characters who were victimized during the Maoist period. This genre gets its name because one of its classics is a short story titled "Scar" (Shanghen), published in 1978 in a major Shanghai newspaper. Its heroine was a young woman who, brainwashed by party propaganda, broke off relations with her mother, who was wrongfully persecuted by the party as a "traitor" and "spy." But doubt, guilt, and pain tormented the heroine, who was sent to the countryside like many of her contemporaries during the Cultural Revolution. She finally sought reconciliation with her mother, who was exonerated after the Cultural Revolution. But before she could get home, her mother suddenly died. "Scar" became an overnight best-seller and inspired an entirely new genre of works exploring the collective trauma of Chinese society.55

后毛泽东时代中国社会的觉醒始于所谓“伤痕文学”的兴起和流行——这类文学作品包括短篇小说、中篇小说、戏剧和电影，其主角是毛泽东时代遭受迫害的虚构人物。这一文学流派得名于其经典之作——1978年发表于上海一家主流报纸的短篇小说《伤痕》。小说的主人公是一位年轻女子，她被党的宣传洗脑，与被党错误地指控为“叛徒”和“间谍”的母亲断绝了关系。然而，怀疑、愧疚和痛苦折磨着这位女主人公，她像许多同龄人在文化大革命期间一样被下放到农村。最终，她试图与在文革后被平反的母亲和解，但还没来得及回家，母亲就突然去世了。《伤痕》一夜之间成为畅销书，并启发了一种全新的文学流派，探索中国社会的集体创伤。

The ostensibly philosophical debate over humanism and alienation under socialism in the early 1980s was another manifestation of the relative freedom of the period. Unlike the scar literature that sought to help a traumatized nation confront its darkest days, the discussion of humanism and alienation in socialist societies undermined the ideological legitimacy of Chinese communism. By emphasizing the humanism in Karl Marx's writings, participants in this debate—exclusively writers, journalists, and social scientists—attacked the brutal rule under Mao as an egregious deviation from Marxism. Even more important, the article launching this debate argued that alienation existed under socialism because the lack of democracy, economic mismanagement, and personality cult resulted in “alienation of power”—the abuse of the power by “the servants of the people.”56

20世纪80年代初，围绕社会主义下的人道主义与异化展开的看似哲学性的辩论，实则是当时相对自由的又一体现。与旨在帮助饱受创伤的国家直面其最黑暗时期的“伤痕文学”不同，这场关于社会主义社会中人道主义与异化的讨论，实际上动摇了中国共产主义的意识形态合法性。通过强调马克思著作中的人道主义思想，这场辩论的参与者——清一色是作家、记者和社会科学家——抨击毛泽东的残酷统治是对马克思主义的严重背离。更重要的是，引发这场辩论的文章认为，社会主义下存在异化，是因为缺乏民主、经济管理不善以及个人崇拜导致了“权力异化”——即“人民公仆”滥用权力。

Even after the fall of Hu Yaobang in January 1987, the space for Chinese writers and social scientists did not disappear. Between early 1985 and the Tiananmen crackdown in June 1989, a "culture fever" swept over China. During this period, Chinese intellectuals explored a diverse set of topics, such as existentialism, the modernization theory, and contrasts between Chinese and Western cultures. On the whole, the culture fever consisted of a self-critical exploration of the reasons behind China's economic backwardness and displayed an eagerness to learn from the West even though one topic that emerged during this period was "neo-authoritarianism," the theory of successful economic development under autocratic rule.57 The culture fever reached its peak with the airing of a six-part documentary, River Elegy (Heshang), in June 1988. Written by a leading liberal writer, this series critically examined the factors of China's failure to modernize and blamed its traditional inward-looking mindset. China Central Television (CCTV), the country's primary official media outlet, broadcast River Elegy, which became an instant success but also infuriated hard-liners because of its liberal tone and themes.58

即使在1987年1月胡耀邦下台之后，中国作家和社会科学家的空间也并未消失。从1985年初到1989年6月天安门事件，一股“文化热潮”席卷中国。在此期间，中国知识分子探讨了诸多议题，例如存在主义、现代化理论以及中西文化的对比。总体而言，这股文化热潮是对中国经济落后原因的自我批判式探究，并展现出向西方学习的渴望，尽管这一时期也出现了“新威权主义”——即在专制统治下实现经济成功的理论。这股文化热潮在1988年6月六集纪录片《河上挽歌》的播出后达到顶峰。该系列纪录片由一位著名的自由派作家撰写，批判性地审视了中国现代化失败的因素，并将矛头指向了其传统的内向型思维。中国中央电视台（CCTV）作为该国的主要官方媒体，播出了《江河挽歌》，该片一经播出便大获成功，但其自由主义的基调和主题也激怒了强硬派。

These literary, ideological, and artistic efforts in the 1980s had the most profound impact on Chinese intellectuals and university students. Some even called this movement "enlightenment" because, collectively, the ideas and values promoted by these works were generally humanistic, cosmopolitan, and liberal.59 In all likelihood, relative intellectual freedom in the 1980s allowed prodemocracy values to influence a generation of students to press for political openness and democracy, a struggle that would end in the tragic confrontation with the party in June 1989.60

20世纪80年代的这些文学、思想和艺术活动对中国知识分子和大学生产生了最为深远的影响。有些人甚至将这场运动称为“启蒙运动”，因为这些作品所宣扬的思想和价值观总体上是人文主义的、世界主义的和自由主义的。很可能，20世纪80年代相对的思想自由使得亲民主价值观影响了一代学生，促使他们争取政治开放和民主，而这场斗争最终以1989年6月与党的悲剧性对抗而告终。

Most accounts of the conservative backlash against liberalization in the 1980s focus on the role of two hard-liners in charge of the party's ideology and propaganda. One was Hu Qiaomu, a Politburo member (1982-1987) and Mao's former speech writer. The other was Deng Liqun (no relation to Deng Xiaoping), director of the CCP propaganda department between 1982 and 1987. On the surface, the backing by Chen Yun, their political patron, emboldened Hu Qiaomu and Deng Liqun to take the lead in attacking liberals, in particular Hu Yaobang.61 In reality, they shared nearly identical views with Deng Xiaoping on the party's imperative to contain the trends of liberalization in the 1980s. A review of the key episodes of conservative backlash against liberalization in this decade shows that Deng Xiaoping, in fact, played a more prominent and direct role in launching the counterattacks on liberalization. Hu Qiaomu and Deng Liqun often acted with Deng Xiaoping's instructions and endorsement.

大多数关于20世纪80年代保守派对自由化的反扑的论述都集中在两位负责党内意识形态和宣传的强硬派人物身上。一位是胡巧木，曾任政治局委员（1982-1987），也是毛泽东的演讲稿撰写人。另一位是邓力群（与邓小平无关），1982年至1987年担任中共中央宣传部部长。表面上看，在他们的政治靠山陈云的支持下，胡巧木和邓力群更加大胆地带头攻击自由派，尤其是胡耀邦。但实际上，在党必须遏制20世纪80年代自由化趋势的问题上，他们的观点与邓小平几乎完全一致。回顾这十年保守派对自由化的反扑关键事件，可以发现邓小平实际上在发起反攻自由化运动中扮演了更为突出和直接的角色。胡巧木和邓立群的行动往往是在邓小平的指示和支持下进行的。

Deng Xiaoping demonstrated his staunch opposition to liberalization as soon as he gained political dominance at the end of 1978. When the Democracy Wall, the first major mass prodemocracy movement in the post-Mao era, emerged in Beijing in late 1978, he expressed some support, apparently because this movement could weaken Hua Guofeng, then the party leader. But Deng revealed his true stance on democracy after he dethroned Hua in December 1978. In March 1979 he not only shut down the Democracy Wall and sentenced its most prominent leader, Wei Jingsheng, to fifteen years in jail, but also announced his "four cardinal principles" reaffirming that the party's monopoly and its official ideology must not be challenged.62

邓小平在1978年底掌握政治权力后，立即展现出对自由化的坚定反对。1978年底，后毛泽东时代第一次大规模群众民主运动“民主墙”在北京兴起，邓小平当时表示支持，显然是因为这场运动可能会削弱时任党主席华国锋的权力。但邓小平在1978年12月罢黜华国锋后，才真正暴露了他对民主的真实立场。1979年3月，他不仅取缔了“民主墙”，判处其主要领导人魏京生15年有期徒刑，还宣布了“四项基本原则”，重申党的垄断及其官方意识形态不容挑战。

As the trends of liberalization gathered pace in the 1980s, Deng either took the lead or backed the hard-liners in trying to suppressing them. Apparently alarmed by signs of liberalization at the end of 1980, he delivered a tough talk at a conference attended by all senior leaders. He lamented that the party had not put up a vigorous effort to "struggle against erroneous ideas that opposed the four cardinal principles." After warning against these trends, Deng emphasized the need to reaffirm the accomplishments and positive aspects of the Maoist era.63 A month after Deng's speech, the party issued a document demanding stricter control of the media. Some of the words of the document were verbatim quotations from Deng's speech.64

20世纪80年代，随着自由化趋势的加速发展，邓小平要么带头，要么支持强硬派试图压制这些趋势。显然，他对1980年底出现的自由化迹象感到担忧，在一次所有高级领导人出席的会议上发表了措辞强硬的讲话。他感叹党没有大力“反对与四大基本原则相悖的错误思想”。在警告这些趋势之后，邓小平强调需要重申毛泽东时代的成就和积极方面。邓小平讲话一个月后，党发布了一份文件，要求加强对媒体的控制。该文件中的一些措辞直接引用了邓小平的讲话。

In some instances, Deng would personally intervene to fight "bourgeois liberalization." The censorship of the movie The Sun and the Man [Taiyang yuren] in 1981 was one such example. This movie was based on a script, Unrequited Love [Kulian], published in September 1979. Its hero is an accomplished artist who returned to China from the West in 1950, only to suffer incessant political persecution during the Maoist period. He later froze to death in the wilderness while on the run. When Unrequited Love was turned into a movie in 1980, it enraged the hard-liners, including Deng Xiaoping. After watching the movie during its prescreening, Deng declared that "the movie smeared the socialist system.... Someone said its artistic achievement was high. But precisely because of this, its poisonous harm is all the greater.... Could you imagine the consequences if 'The Sun and the Man' were to be shown in public?"65 Fortunately, resistance from the liberals prevented a full-scale crackdown on the intelligentsia in the wake of this incident.66

在某些情况下，邓小平会亲自干预以对抗“资产阶级自由化”。1981年电影《太阳与人》的审查就是一个例子。这部电影改编自1979年9月发表的剧本《单恋》。故事的主人公是一位才华横溢的艺术家，1950年从西方回到中国，却在毛泽东时代遭受了持续不断的政治迫害。后来，他在逃亡途中冻死在荒野。1980年，《单恋》被改编成电影，激怒了包括邓小平在内的强硬派。邓小平在观看影片的预映后宣称：“这部电影抹黑了社会主义制度……有人说它的艺术成就很高。但正因为如此，它的毒害才更大……你们能想象《太阳与人》如果公映会造成什么后果吗？”65 所幸，自由派人士的抵制阻止了此次事件后对知识分子的全面镇压。66

Deng Xiaoping's intervention during the debate on alienation would eventually result in the party's "anti-spiritual pollution" campaign in 1983, the first nationwide crackdown on liberalization in the post-Mao era. After liberal intellectuals launched the debate on alienation under socialism, the hard-liners, led by Hu Qiaomu and Deng Liquun, tried to suppress the debate and punish the proponents of "alienation under socialism." After Hu Yaobang thwarted their attempts, the two hard-liners went directly to Deng Xiaoping and apparently obtained his support to punish the liberals who started this debate in September 1983.67

邓小平在关于异化的辩论中的介入，最终导致了1983年党的“反精神污染”运动，这是后毛泽东时代第一次全国性的反自由化运动。在自由派知识分子发起关于社会主义异化的辩论后，以胡巧木和邓力群为首的强硬派试图压制这场辩论，并惩罚“社会主义异化”的倡导者。在胡耀邦挫败他们的企图后，这两位强硬派直接去找邓小平，显然得到了他的支持，从而惩罚了在1983年9月发起这场辩论的自由派人士。

The most important fallout from the controversy over "alienation under socialism" was the anti-spiritual pollution campaign. Backing the stance of the hard-liners on the debate in September 1983, Deng Xiaoping said "we must not do (bugao) spiritual pollution." At a Central Committee plenum on October 12, 1983, he reiterated his resolve, declaring that "spiritual pollution must not be allowed on the ideological front."68 Deng's public stance instantly changed the political dynamics. The party's propaganda machine went into overdrive and launched a nationwide campaign against spiritual pollution. Although the conservatives initially targeted the liberal intelligentsia, they quickly expanded the scope of the campaign to crack down on pop culture, entertainment, and people's lifestyles, thus fanning fears of another Cultural Revolution.69 Aware of the consequences of the conservative counterattack, Hu Yaobang and Zhao Ziyang formed a united front to put the brakes on the campaign. After realizing the harmful effects of the campaign on his economic reform drive, Deng reversed course. As a result, the campaign died a quiet death within a month.70

“社会主义异化”争议最重要的后果是反精神污染运动。1983年9月，邓小平支持强硬派在辩论中的立场，指出“我们绝不能搞精神污染”。1983年10月12日，在中央全会上，他重申了这一决心，宣布“思想战线上绝不能搞精神污染”。邓小平的公开表态立即改变了政治格局。党的宣传机器火力全开，在全国范围内发起了一场反精神污染运动。尽管保守派最初的目标是自由派知识分子，但他们很快扩大了运动范围，开始打压流行文化、娱乐和人们的生活方式，从而加剧了人们对再次发生文化大革命的恐惧。意识到保守派反击的后果，胡耀邦和赵紫阳结成统一战线，试图阻止这场运动。邓小平在意识到这场运动对其经济改革的负面影响后，改变了策略。结果，这场运动在一个月内悄然消亡。





The Road to Tiananmen





通往天安门之路


For the first half of the 1980s, Deng appeared to be successful in playing a role as the pivotal player. Economically, his alliance with the liberals achieved critical breakthroughs in the decollectivization of agriculture, liberalization of the economy, and opening to the West. Although he also aligned with the hardliners during this period in suppressing liberalizing trends, he would quickly reverse course once he realized that political retrogression would threaten economic reform, as shown in the short-lived campaign against spiritual pollution in 1983. Politically, he succeeded in containing the liberals with periodic crackdowns on prominent members of the intelligentsia and the causes they advocated without fatally undermining his alliance with them.

在20世纪80年代上半叶，邓小平似乎成功地扮演了关键人物的角色。在经济方面，他与自由派的联盟在农业非集体化、经济自由化和对外开放等方面取得了重大突破。尽管在此期间，他也曾与强硬派结盟，压制自由化趋势，但一旦意识到政治倒退会威胁经济改革，他便迅速改变策略，正如1983年短暂的“精神污染”运动所表明的那样。在政治方面，他通过定期打压知识分子及其所倡导的事业，成功地遏制了自由派，同时又没有彻底破坏与他们的联盟。

But starting in 1986 Deng began to find it increasingly difficult to perform this balancing act. As economic reforms in the urban areas turned out to be much tougher than those in the rural areas, Deng began to toy with the idea of endorsing limited political reforms to increase efficiency, but without introducing democracy or undermining the party's monopoly. His dalliance with political reforms occurred at a time when the intelligentsia and university students were growing more vocal in agitating for political liberalization. The result was that Deng's rhetoric on political reform unintentionally encouraged university students to take to the streets in several Chinese cities in late 1986 to demand democratic changes, thus triggering the first of the two major political crises facing Deng in the post-Mao era.

但从1986年开始，邓小平发现越来越难以维持这种平衡。由于城市地区的经济改革远比农村地区艰难，邓小平开始考虑在不引入民主或削弱党的垄断地位的前提下，推行有限的政治改革以提高效率。他涉足政治改革之际，知识分子和大学生正日益高涨地呼吁政治自由化。结果，邓小平关于政治改革的言论无意中刺激了大学生在1986年底走上中国多个城市的街头，要求民主变革，从而引发了后毛泽东时代邓小平面临的两大政治危机中的第一次。

But the greatest mistake Deng made, and the one that fatally weakened his effectiveness as the pivotal player, was his decision to sack Hu Yaobang, who consistently resisted pressure from him to crack down on "bourgeois liberalization" in the early 1980s. When Deng removed Hu as party chief following the outbreak of the prodemocracy demonstrations in late 1986, he lost a capable ally. Even though Deng managed to appoint Zhao Ziyang, who was at that time a liberal economic reformer, the fall of Hu Yaobang shifted the balance of power decisively in favor of the conservatives.

但邓小平犯下的最大错误，也是致命地削弱了他作为核心人物效力的罪魁祸首，是他决定罢免胡耀邦。胡耀邦在20世纪80年代初一直抵制邓小平镇压“资产阶级自由化”的压力。1986年底民主运动爆发后，邓小平解除了胡耀邦的党总书记职务，失去了一位得力的盟友。尽管邓小平后来任命了当时的自由派经济改革家赵紫阳接任，但胡耀邦的下台彻底改变了权力平衡，使保守派占据了上风。

The resultant unfavorable balance of power was likely the cause of the growing resistance Deng faced between 1987 and 1988 to his efforts to accelerate reforms in the urban areas and to open China's doors even wider to the West. Even though agricultural decollectivization and liberalization unleashed private entrepreneurs and gave birth to the "township and village enterprises" (TVEs), private firms disguised as collective firms, Deng could claim no progress in restructuring the unprofitable state-owned enterprises.71 An ambitious but ill-timed effort to ram through price reforms in the summer of 1988 led to panic buying and run-away inflation, forcing Deng to retreat and leading to a weakening of Zhao's position.72 Starting in the second half of the 1980s, the pace of opening up to the West also slowed down. Establishment of the Hainan Administrative District, with its expanded foreign trade authority, resulted in a smuggling scandal that the conservatives exploited to block Deng from creating a much larger SEZ.73 In terms of economic reforms, Deng had little to show between 1987 and the outbreak of the Tiananmen protests in April 1989.

由此产生的不利权力平衡很可能是邓小平在1987年至1988年间，在加快城市改革和进一步扩大对外开放方面遭遇日益增长的阻力的原因。尽管农业非集体化和自由化释放了私人企业家，催生了“乡镇企业”（伪装成集体企业的私人企业），但邓小平在重组无利可图的国有企业方面却毫无进展。1988年夏季，一项雄心勃勃但时机不当的价格改革举措引发了恐慌性抢购和恶性通货膨胀，迫使邓小平退让，并导致赵立坚的地位削弱。从20世纪80年代后半期开始，对外开放的步伐也放缓了。海南行政区的设立及其扩大的对外贸易权限导致了一起走私丑闻，保守派利用这起丑闻阻止邓小平建立规模更大的经济特区。在经济改革方面，从1987年到1989年4月天安门事件爆发，邓小平几乎没有取得任何成就。





The Fall of Hu Yaobang and the Anti-Bourgeois Liberalization Campaign





胡耀邦的垮台与反资产阶级自由化运动


The surprise dismissal of Hu Yaobang as CCP general secretary in January 1987 marked a political turning point in Chinese politics in the post-Mao era.74 This event not only signaled Deng's resolve to defend the party's monopoly on power even at the cost of sacrificing a longtime ally but also foreshadowed his purge of Zhao Ziyang, another trusted supporter, nearly two and half years later. The fall of Hu Yaobang decisively strengthened the hard-liners and weakened both Deng and the liberals. The immediate political consequences of Hu's downfall consisted of a short-lived crackdown on "bourgeois liberalization" and the stalling of the economic reforms.

1987年1月，胡耀邦被意外免去中共中央总书记职务，这标志着后毛泽东时代中国政治的一个转折点。这一事件不仅表明邓小平决心捍卫党的权力垄断，即使这意味着牺牲一位长期盟友也在所不惜，而且也预示着近两年半后，他将清洗另一位亲信赵紫阳。胡耀邦的下台极大地增强了强硬派的力量，削弱了邓小平及其自由派的势力。胡耀邦下台的直接政治后果是对“资产阶级自由化”的短暂镇压以及经济改革的停滞。

Given Hu's liberal political views, it may be difficult to understand why Deng, a staunch Leninist despite his pragmatist streaks, picked him for the position of CCP general secretary. One obvious explanation is their close personal relationship. After Deng returned to power in 1973, he appointed Hu to lead the Chinese Academy of Sciences. During Mao's campaign against Deng in late 1975, Hu refused to denounce Deng, thus proving his loyalty. Hu's contributions were also considerable during Deng's power play against Hua Guofeng in 1978, in particular his instrumental role in leading the debate on the criterion of truth and in rehabilitating many senior leaders whom Mao had persecuted during the Cultural Revolution.75

鉴于胡锦涛的自由派政治观点，人们或许难以理解，尽管邓小平本人也具有务实的一面，但他却是一位坚定的列宁主义者，为何会选择胡锦涛担任中共中央总书记。一个显而易见的解释是他们之间密切的私人关系。1973年邓小平重返政坛后，任命胡锦涛为中国科学院院长。1975年末毛泽东对邓小平发起攻势期间，胡锦涛拒绝谴责邓小平，以此证明了他对邓小平的忠诚。1978年邓小平与华国锋的权力斗争中，胡锦涛也发挥了重要作用，尤其是在领导关于真理标准的辩论以及平反许多在文化大革命期间被毛泽东迫害的高级领导人方面，他做出了关键贡献。

Despite their personal friendship and Hu's proven leadership abilities, the relationship between Deng and Hu began to fray over the issue of "bourgeois liberalization." Unlike Deng, who sought to restore CCP legitimacy through economic reforms, Hu envisioned reform as a more comprehensive process that entailed a high degree of democracy.76 During his tenure, he was credited with a dramatic relaxation of the party's harsh policy toward ethnic minorities, and, in the case of Tibet, he almost single-handedly pushed through a policy that resulted in the withdrawal of many Han Chinese officials and improvements in the living conditions of Tibetans.77 On foreign policy, Hu advocated improving ties with Japan. But as a politician in the CCP's Hobbesian world, Hu's integrity, tolerance, and openness that endeared him to the liberal intelligentsia turned out to be fatal political liabilities. After he was forced to resign, Hu painfully admitted his naivete. "[I did] not know how duplicitous people could be," he told another senior liberal official. "I realized my folly only when I was dismissed at the beginning of 1987."78

尽管邓小平与胡锦涛私交甚笃，且胡锦涛的领导才能也已得到证实，但两人关系却因“资产阶级自由化”问题而开始出现裂痕。与邓小平寻求通过经济改革恢复中共合法性不同，胡锦涛设想的改革是一个更为全面的过程，其中包含高度民主。在他任职期间，胡锦涛因大幅放松党对少数民族的严苛政策而备受赞誉，尤其是在西藏问题上，他几乎凭借一己之力推动了一项政策，该政策导致许多汉族官员撤离西藏，并改善了藏人的生活条件。在外交政策方面，胡锦涛主张改善与日本的关系。然而，作为中共“霍布斯式世界”中的一名政治家，胡锦涛的正直、宽容和开放的性格虽然赢得了自由派知识分子的喜爱，却最终成为致命的政治包袱。被迫辞职后，胡锦涛痛苦地承认了自己的天真。 “我当时不知道人可以如此虚伪，”他告诉另一位自由派高级官员。“直到1987年初被解职，我才意识到自己的愚蠢。”

According to Zhao Ziyang, Deng's erosion of trust in Hu grew gradually in the 1980s because Deng thought Hu was too weak to deal with the emerging liberalizing trends. Zhao believed that Deng and Hu held "genuinely different views" on "bourgeois liberalization," and the breakdown of their relationship was "unavoidable."79 As early as July 1981, Deng revealed his dissatisfaction with Hu's resistance to cracking down on the liberal intelligentsia with his criticism that party work on the "theoretical front," an area for which Hu was responsible, was "lax and weak." Their rift widened further even before Deng launched the anti-spiritual pollution campaign in October 1983. Deng blamed Hu for tolerating the growing liberalizing trends among the intelligentsia.80 Although Deng reluctantly called off the anti-spiritual pollution campaign at the end of 1983, Zhao believed that Hu's apparent resistance to the campaign "aggravated the conflict between them a great deal."81 Based on Zhao's observation, Deng had made up his mind to remove Hu in 1986, if not earlier. In the summer of 1986, he privately told a group of veteran revolutionaries that he had made a big mistake in selecting Hu Yaobang and that Hu would not continue to serve as party chief when the Thirteenth Party Congress was convened in 1987. In other words, Hu's political fate had already been sealed several months before his formal ouster.82

据赵紫阳所述，邓小平对胡锦涛的信任在20世纪80年代逐渐瓦解，因为邓小平认为胡锦涛无力应对新兴的自由化趋势。赵紫阳认为，邓小平和胡锦涛在“资产阶级自由化”问题上持有“截然不同的观点”，两人关系的破裂“不可避免”。早在1981年7月，邓小平就对胡锦涛不愿镇压自由派知识分子表示不满，批评党在“理论战线”（胡锦涛负责的领域）的工作“松懈无力”。早在邓小平1983年10月发起“反精神污染”运动之前，他和胡耀邦的裂痕就已经进一步加深。邓小平指责胡耀邦容忍知识分子日益增长的自由化倾向。尽管邓小平在1983年底不情愿地叫停了“反精神污染”运动，但赵认为，胡耀邦对这场运动的明显抵制“大大加剧了他们之间的冲突”。根据赵的观察，邓小平早在1986年，甚至更早，就已下定决心要除掉胡耀邦。1986年夏天，他私下告诉一群老革命者，他选择胡耀邦是个大错，胡耀邦不会在1987年召开的中共十三大上继续担任党的总书记。换句话说，胡耀邦的政治命运早在正式被罢免几个月前就已经注定了。

Although Deng made his own decision to dismiss Hu without manipulation or pressure by the conservatives, his action could only have delighted the hard-liners who had been seeking Hu Yaobang's removal.83 Deng launched a nationwide "anti-bourgeois liberalization" campaign after Hu's dismissal in January 1987, creating another golden opportunity for the conservatives to roll back economic reforms. Even though Deng wanted to limit the backlash against liberalism to the ideological sphere, the conservatives tried to expand the crackdown to culture, education, science, and the lifestyles of ordinary people. The crackdown had an immediate chilling effect on economic reform. The experiment to empower managers of SOEs ground to a halt, and foreign direct investment plummeted in the first half of 1987.84

尽管邓小平在没有受到保守派操纵或施压的情况下，自主决定解除胡耀邦的职务，但他的举动无疑令那些一直寻求胡耀邦下台的强硬派欣喜不已。1987年1月胡耀邦被解职后，邓小平随即在全国范围内发起了一场“反资产阶级自由化”运动，这为保守派提供了又一次阻碍经济改革的绝佳机会。尽管邓小平希望将反自由主义的浪潮限制在意识形态领域，但保守派却试图将镇压范围扩大到文化、教育、科学以及普通民众的生活方式。这场镇压立即对经济改革产生了寒蝉效应。赋予国有企业管理者更多权力的实验陷入停滞，1987年上半年外国直接投资大幅下降。

To counter the conservative backlash and salvage economic reform, Zhao not only declared to senior officials in January 1987 that the party would not change its policy on comprehensive reform and opening but also warned against "leftist" excesses and another witch hunt.85 Privately, he lobbied Deng in late April, warning him that "some people are trying to use the anti-bourgeois liberalization campaign to undermine reform and opening." An alarmed Deng immediately gave his personal support to Zhao's proposal to deliver a major speech that would constitute a counterattack against the conservatives. Shortly thereafter Zhao delivered his famous "May 13 speech" at a conference for high-level officials that effectively ended the anti-bourgeois liberalization campaign.86

为了应对保守派的反扑，挽救经济改革，赵立坚不仅在1987年1月向高级官员宣布党不会改变全面改革开放的方针，还警告不要出现“左倾”极端行为和再次进行政治迫害。85 私下里，他在4月下旬游说邓小平，警告他“有人企图利用反资产阶级自由化运动破坏改革开放”。邓小平对此感到震惊，立即亲自支持赵立坚的提议，发表重要讲话，对保守派进行反击。不久之后，赵立坚在一次高级官员会议上发表了著名的“五一三报告”，有效地结束了反资产阶级自由化运动。86

The fall of Hu Yaobang in January 1987 dealt the liberals a near-fatal blow. They lost a powerful advocate for liberalization, and, more important, Hu's departure greatly strengthened the hard-liners. Because there were no suitable candidates to take over the position of party chief, Deng appointed Zhao to replace Hu, a move that entailed the promotion of Li Peng to the position of premier of the State Council and Yao Yilin to executive vice premier. Now wielding enormous influence over the economy, the two hard-liners were also elevated to the PSC at the party's Thirteenth Party Congress in fall of that year.

1987年1月胡耀邦的下台对自由派造成了近乎致命的打击。他们失去了一位强有力的自由化倡导者，更重要的是，胡耀邦的离任极大地增强了强硬派的力量。由于没有合适的人选接任党总书记一职，邓小平任命赵立坚接替胡耀邦，此举意味着李鹏升任国务院总理，姚益林升任国务院常务副总理。如今，这两位强硬派人士对经济拥有了巨大的影响力，并在同年秋季召开的党的十三大上被提拔为国家政治保卫委员会委员。

The emboldened conservatives soon set their sights on Zhao because he had used Deng's support to thwart the conservative counterattack against reform. Zhao further enraged the hard-liners by abolishing the Central Secretariat's Research Office, controlled by the hard-liner Deng Liquin, depriving him of the institutional base that had served as his platform for organizing ideological campaigns against reform. The relationship between the dwindling liberal forces represented by Zhao and the conservatives became so tense that, when Zhao was delivering his keynote speech at the Thirteenth Party Congress in October 1987, Chen Yun, the arch conservative and patron of Deng Liquin, stood up and left the stage, in a very public and calculated display of disapproval.87

胆子越来越大的保守派很快将矛头指向赵立坚，因为他曾利用邓立坚的支持挫败保守派对改革的反击。赵立坚解散了由强硬派邓立坚控制的中央书记处研究办公室，进一步激怒了强硬派，使邓立坚失去了组织反对改革意识形态运动的制度基础。赵立坚所代表的日渐式微的自由派力量与保守派之间的关系变得异常紧张。1987年10月，赵立坚在中共十三大上发表主旨演讲时，邓立坚的支持者、保守派领袖陈云起身离席，公开表达了他对赵立坚的不满。

But the fall of Hu Yaobang also weakened Deng politically because he could be a pivotal player only if the liberal wing in the party on which he had to rely to push through his economic agenda remained strong. Now Deng had a weaker ally to help him counter the conservatives. Between January 1987 and the outbreak of the Tiananmen prodemocracy movement in April 1989, Deng was unable to advance any ambitious economic reforms. The strategy of focusing on developing an export-oriented economy on China's coast, which Zhao proposed, did not become actual policy despite Deng's backing. The price reform Deng tried to rush through in the late summer of 1988 only succeeded in triggering an inflation crisis, which undercut Zhao's authority and enabled the conservatives to mount a retrenchment campaign to roll back the economic reforms.

但胡耀邦的倒台也削弱了邓小平的政治影响力，因为只有党内自由派保持强大，邓小平才能继续发挥关键作用，而自由派正是他推行经济政策的支柱。如今，邓小平的盟友实力下降，难以对抗保守派。从1987年1月到1989年4月天安门民主运动爆发，邓小平未能推进任何雄心勃勃的经济改革。赵立坚提出的以沿海地区为中心发展出口导向型经济的战略，尽管得到了邓小平的支持，最终也未能成为实际政策。1988年夏末，邓小平试图仓促推行的价格改革，结果却引发了通货膨胀危机，削弱了赵立坚的权威，也让保守派得以发起反攻，试图推翻经济改革。





The Tiananmen Crisis and the Fall of Zhao Ziyang





天安门事件与赵紫阳的陨落


Before the fall of Hu Yaobang in January 1987, Zhao was not the primary target of the conservatives, who saw Hu, party general secretary responsible for day-to-day party affairs, as a much greater threat than Zhao. Zhao avoided direct attacks by the conservatives also because he seldom spoke out on sensitive ideological issues, and his effective implementation of reformist policies had earned Deng's strong support. However, after Deng replaced Hu with Zhao as party chief in January 1987, it did not take long for the conservatives to start trying to topple him. The campaign against Zhao gathered momentum in the summer of 1988 when a poorly timed proposal by Deng to implement price reform triggered a spike in inflation. Although Zhao had not proposed the idea, he took responsibility to avoid placing the blame on Deng.88 The conservatives in charge of the State Council, Li Peng and Yao Yilin, seized this opportunity to sideline Zhao in economic policymaking. A group of retired leaders reportedly wrote a joint letter to Deng calling for Zhao's dismissal. However, Deng stood by Zhao, telling him that he wanted him to serve a second term as the party chief and even offering him the position of chairman of the CMC at one point.89 Although Deng's support helped Zhao retain his job, his position had become increasingly untenable by early 1989.

在胡耀邦于1987年1月下台之前，赵立坚并非保守派的主要目标。保守派认为，负责党内日常事务的胡耀邦总书记比赵立坚更具威胁性。赵立坚之所以没有受到保守派的直接攻击，部分原因在于他很少在敏感的意识形态问题上发表意见，而且他有效推行改革政策赢得了邓小平的强力支持。然而，1987年1月邓小平用赵立坚取代胡耀邦担任党的总书记后不久，保守派就开始试图扳倒赵立坚。1988年夏天，邓小平提出的一项不合时宜的价格改革方案引发了通货膨胀飙升，这场针对赵立坚的攻势也随之愈演愈烈。尽管赵立坚并非该方案的提出者，但他为了避免将责任推卸给邓小平而承担了责任。国务院的保守派领导人李鹏和姚一林抓住这一机会，在经济政策制定中边缘化赵立坚。据报道，一群退休领导人联名致信邓小平，要求解除赵的职务。然而，邓小平力挺赵，表示希望他连任党总书记，甚至一度提出让他担任中央军委主席。尽管邓小平的支持帮助赵保住了职位，但到1989年初，他的处境已变得越来越岌岌可危。

After college students in Beijing went to Tiananmen Square to mourn the death of Hu Yaobang on April 15, 1989, the conservatives finally got their opportunity. By pure coincidence, Zhao Ziyang was scheduled to leave Beijing for an official visit to North Korea on April 24. Before Zhao left Beijing, however, he went to see Deng and obtained support for his proposal to take moderate measures to deal with the demonstrations. But immediately after Zhao left Beijing, the conservatives called a PSC meeting to discuss the situation in Beijing, even though the student-led demonstrations had all but died down by then. In Zhao's absence, the conservatives could turn Deng, a hard-line authoritarian, into an ally. Indeed, on April 25 Li Peng went to Deng's house to report on the discussions during the PSC meeting the previous night. Deng's reaction was predictable: He immediately declared that the events in the square were "not an ordinary student movement but a turmoil," and he called for a speedy and tough reaction, which completely contradicted his prior support for Zhao's proposed moderate approach.

1989年4月15日，北京大学生前往天安门广场悼念胡耀邦逝世后，保守派终于迎来了机会。巧合的是，赵紫阳原定于4月24日离开北京前往朝鲜进行正式访问。然而，在离开北京之前，赵紫阳拜访了邓小平，并获得了邓小平对其温和应对示威活动的提议的支持。但赵紫阳离开北京后，保守派立即召开了国家政治事务委员会（简称“政治局”）会议，讨论北京局势，尽管当时学生领导的示威活动几乎已经平息。趁着赵紫阳不在，保守派有机会将强硬派领导人邓小平拉拢为盟友。事实上，4月25日，李鹏前往邓小平的住所，汇报了前一天晚上政治局会议的讨论情况。邓小平的反应在意料之中：他立即宣称广场上的事件“不是普通的学生运动，而是一场骚乱”，并呼吁迅速采取强硬措施予以应对，这与他之前支持赵立坚提出的温和路线完全矛盾。

Even though Deng's speech was not supposed to be publicized, Li Peng circulated it among senior party officials and then turned it into the infamous People's Daily editorial published on April 26, apparently without consulting Deng. Publication of this editorial, which was known to reflect Deng's hard-line stance, instantly fueled anger among the students and turned them against Deng. The next day, hundreds of thousands of students again took to the streets of Beijing, calling on the party to retract the editorial, an impossible demand because that would be a public humiliation for Deng. After Zhao's return from North Korea on April 30, he tried in vain to de-escalate the confrontation. By that time, however, Deng was no longer open to suggestions for a moderate solution. He refused to grant Zhao an audience, an indication of his loss of confidence in Zhao.

尽管邓小平的讲话原本不打算公开，但李鹏却将其传阅给党内高层，并最终将其改编成臭名昭著的《人民日报》社论，于4月26日发表，显然并未事先征求邓小平的意见。这篇社论反映了邓小平的强硬立场，其发表立即激起了学生的愤怒，使他们转而反对邓小平。第二天，数十万学生再次走上北京街头，要求党撤回社论，但这几乎是不可能实现的，因为这将是对邓小平的公开羞辱。4月30日赵立坚从朝鲜返回后，他试图缓和局势，但徒劳无功。此时，邓小平已不再愿意接受任何温和的解决方案。他拒绝接见赵立坚，这表明他对赵立坚失去了信心。

The final break between Deng and Zhao occurred on May 16, when Zhao disclosed at a meeting with visiting Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev that Deng remained the party's ultimate decision-maker. According to Zhao, he had made similar statements earlier to other Communist leaders, and, in this particular case, his intent was to affirm Deng's authority and prestige, not to undermine him. However, Deng apparently thought Zhao was trying to shift the blame to him, thus further enraging him, as Zhao later wrote. Deng must have viewed Zhao's action as treachery. The next day, May 17, Deng decided to impose martial law and fired Zhao.90 On June 4, more than two weeks later, PLA tanks rolled into Beijing and crushed the Tiananmen prodemocracy movement, killing at least hundreds of students and ordinary citizens in both the capital and the provinces.91

邓小平与赵立坚的最终决裂发生在5月16日。当天，赵立坚在会见来访的苏联领导人戈尔巴乔夫时透露，邓小平仍然是党的最终决策者。据赵立坚称，他此前也曾对其他共产党领导人发表过类似的言论，而这一次，他的目的是为了维护邓小平的权威和威望，而非削弱他的地位。然而，邓小平显然认为赵立坚试图将责任推卸给他，这更加激怒了他，正如赵立坚后来所写的那样。邓小平必定将赵立坚的行为视为背叛。第二天，即5月17日，邓小平决定实施戒严，并解除了赵立坚的职务。两周多后的6月4日，解放军坦克开进北京，镇压了天安门民主运动，造成首都及周边地区至少数百名学生和普通民众丧生。

In retrospect, the Tiananmen massacre and the fall of Zhao, a turning point in post-Mao history, appear to have been entirely avoidable. Obviously, had Zhao postponed or canceled his scheduled visit to North Korea, the conservatives could not have outmaneuvered him and turned Deng into their ally. Gorbachev's untimely visit to Beijing was another factor. The student movement had lost momentum by early May, but Gorbachev's scheduled visit on May 15-16 gave the sagging movement a second wind, as students took advantage of the international media spotlight to stage a mass hunger strike on Tiananmen Square to pressure Deng.

事后看来，天安门事件和赵立坚的下台——后毛泽东时代历史的转折点——似乎完全可以避免。显然，如果赵立坚推迟或取消原定的访朝行程，保守派就无法智胜他，也无法将邓小平拉拢到自己阵营。戈尔巴乔夫不合时宜的访华也是一个重要因素。学生运动在五月初已略显疲软，但戈尔巴乔夫5月15日至16日的访华却为这场低迷的运动注入了新的活力。学生们利用国际媒体的关注，在天安门广场举行了大规模绝食抗议，向邓小平施压。

Historical contingencies, in this case, may not have played as critical a role as one might have wished. Today, one can make the case that by early 1989 Deng's reform and opening was in deep trouble, largely due to Deng's own mistakes. His hostility to democracy and liberalism led him to sack Hu Yaobang, fatally weakening the liberal wing that he had to rely on to prevail against the hard-liners. Although he managed to replace Hu with another reformer, Zhao Ziyang, the emboldened and strengthened conservatives took over the State Council and wasted no time in waging a campaign to topple Zhao. They succeeded all too soon, again thanks to help from Deng Xiaoping.

在这种情况下，历史偶然因素或许并未发挥人们所期望的那般关键作用。如今，我们可以说，到1989年初，邓小平的改革开放已陷入困境，这很大程度上是由于他自身的失误。他对民主和自由主义的敌视导致他罢免了胡耀邦，这严重削弱了他赖以对抗强硬派的自由派力量。尽管他设法用另一位改革派人士赵紫阳取代了胡耀邦，但胆子更大、势力更强的保守派掌控了国务院，并迅速发动了一场推翻赵紫阳的运动。他们很快就得逞了，而这再次要归功于邓小平的帮助。





Reflections





反思


The reforms undertaken by the party in the 1980s constituted a comprehensive political institutionalization effort aimed mainly at stabilizing a regime ravaged by the radicalism and brutality of the Cultural Revolution. On the whole, the party's reforms to reinstitute collective leadership, improve elite security, and establish rules on term and age limits marked an important step in the transition away from totalitarianism. Additional reforms, such as building a legal system and relaxing social control, helped create a more friendly business environment and greater space for personal freedom. However, these restorative reforms had serious limitations. The self-interests of the top leaders, especially Deng himself, diluted the application and effectiveness of the reforms. In practice, as these top leaders were exempt from the rules, the reforms failed to constrain them from violating the very rules and norms they were trying to enshrine. Most critically, the reforms were not backed by effective mechanisms of enforcement. This might not have been a problem when there was a rough balance of power among competing factions, as was the case in the 1980s and in the post-Tiananmen period (1992-2012). But when this balance of power broke down and a strongman re-emerged, the institutional reforms Deng had put in place crumbled quickly.

20世纪80年代，党推行的改革是一项全面的政治制度化努力，其主要目的是稳定一个饱受文化大革命的激进主义和残酷暴行摧残的政权。总体而言，党的改革，包括重建集体领导、加强精英安全保障以及制定任期和年龄限制等，标志着党从极权主义过渡的重要一步。其他改革，例如建立法律体系和放松社会管制，有助于营造更加友好的营商环境和更大的个人自由空间。然而，这些恢复性改革存在严重的局限性。最高领导人，特别是邓小平本人的私利削弱了改革的实施和成效。实际上，由于这些最高领导人不受规则约束，改革未能约束他们违反自己试图维护的规则和规范。最关键的是，这些改革缺乏有效的执行机制。如果各派势力之间大致势均力敌，这或许不是问题，就像上世纪80年代和后天安门时期（1992-2012年）那样。但当这种权力平衡被打破，强人再次出现时，邓小平推行的制度改革也迅速瓦解。

A feasible solution is to establish genuine institutional constraints within the regime, such as by introducing inner-party democracy, reducing the power of the Leninist party-state, and creating more political space for other autonomous social forces. Indeed, the political reform blueprint Zhao and his advisers conceived in 1986-1987 was intended to accomplish these objectives. In this sense, Zhao's attempted institutional reforms were transformative, not restorative. They were far more radical than the relatively modest steps Deng had taken earlier in the decade to repair the damage inflicted on the party by Mao. If Deng's reforms were designed to preserve the core features of Leninism and make party rule more stable and durable, Zhao's reforms sought to turn a post-totalitarian regime into a looser and more pluralistic authoritarian regime dominated by one party. Sadly, Zhao's efforts did not succeed. After making some real, although modest, initial progress, Zhao's reforms stalled. As he later admitted, "in reality, after the Thirteenth Party Congress, it became very difficult to implement or sustain political system reform."92 When the PLA tanks rolled into Tiananmen Square on June 4, 1989, the party not only crushed the prodemocracy movement but also extinguished any hopes of a regime-initiated gradual transition.

一个可行的解决方案是在政权内部建立真正的制度约束，例如引入党内民主、削弱列宁主义党国权力，并为其他自主的社会力量创造更多政治空间。事实上，赵立坚及其顾问在1986-1987年构思的政治改革蓝图正是为了实现这些目标。从这个意义上讲，赵立坚的制度改革尝试是变革性的，而非修复性的。这些改革远比邓小平在十年前为修复毛泽东对党造成的损害而采取的相对温和的措施更为激进。如果说邓小平的改革旨在保留列宁主义的核心特征，并使党的统治更加稳定和持久，那么赵立坚的改革则力图将一个后极权主义政权转变为一个由一党主导的、更加松散和多元化的威权政权。遗憾的是，赵立坚的努力并未成功。在取得一些实质性的、尽管幅度不大的初步进展后，赵立坚的改革便停滞不前。正如他后来承认的那样，“实际上，在党的十三大之后，政治体制改革的实施和维持变得非常困难。”1989年6月4日，解放军坦克开进天安门广场，党不仅镇压了民主运动，也扼杀了政权发起渐进式过渡的任何希望。

In retrospect, however, the pathway to democracy via a party-sanctioned program of reform was too narrow to be viable. Regime-initiated reform, or "transformation," according to Samuel Huntington, requires that the reformers in the regime maintain political dominance.93 But with Deng firmly aligned with the hard-liners in opposing any change that could undermine party power, the balance of power decisively favored the hard-liners. This balance grew even more lopsided after the dismissal of Hu Yaobang in January 1987.

然而，事后看来，通过党批准的改革方案实现民主的道路过于狭窄，难以行得通。根据塞缪尔·亨廷顿的说法，政权主导的改革，或者说“转型”，要求政权内部的改革派保持政治主导地位。但由于邓小平坚定地与强硬派站在一起，反对任何可能削弱党权力的变革，权力平衡明显向强硬派倾斜。1987年1月胡耀邦被解职后，这种权力平衡更加失衡。

The greatest negative legacy of the 1980s is the preservation of the core institutions of a totalitarian regime. The tenacious opposition to political liberalization by Deng and his hard-line allies shielded these institutions from even the moderate reforms envisioned by Zhao's task force in 1987. Throughout the 1980s, as would be the case in the post-Tiananmen period as well as in the Xi Jinping era, the CCP maintained a monopoly on violence through its direct control of the military and other coercive forces. It was the military that saved the party from the nationwide popular prodemocracy movement in the spring of 1989. The modest steps Zhao took to "separate the party from the government," most of which were reversed after his purge, hardly made a dent in the party's tight grip on the Chinese state. Throughout the post-Mao period, the party remained as deeply entrenched in the state as ever.

20世纪80年代最大的负面遗产是极权政权核心制度的保存。邓小平及其强硬派盟友对政治自由化的顽固抵制，使得这些制度甚至免于赵立坚1987年工作组提出的温和改革。整个80年代，正如后天安门时代以及习近平时代一样，中共通过对军队和其他强制力量的直接控制，维持了对暴力的垄断。正是军队在1989年春季席卷全国的民主运动中拯救了中共。赵立坚为“党政分离”所采取的温和措施（其中大部分在其清洗后被撤销）几乎没有撼动中共对中国国家的牢牢控制。在后毛泽东时代，中共对国家的控制力依然根深蒂固。

The party's control of information in the 1980s was weakened moderately, due partly to protection of the liberals by reformers such as Hu and Zhao, and partly to the impact of an increasingly commercially oriented media market.94 But the mechanisms that enabled the party to limit access to information, such as state-owned television networks, newspapers, and publishing companies, the prohibitions against private ownership of media outlets, and the party's nationwide propaganda networks that censor news, were kept, allowing the party to tighten the control whenever needed. The use of terror, a hallmark of totalitarianism, declined significantly throughout the 1980s. However, the party retained its capacity to deploy terror against certain segments of the population (as during Deng's draconian anticrime drive in 1983) or to crush prodemocracy forces (as in the Tiananmen crackdown in 1989).

20世纪80年代，党对信息的控制有所削弱，部分原因是胡锦涛和赵立坚等改革派对自由派的保护，部分原因是日益商业化的媒体市场的影响。但党限制信息获取的机制，例如国有电视台、报纸和出版社，禁止媒体私有化，以及党在全国范围内审查新闻的宣传网络，仍然保留了下来，这使得党能够在必要时加强控制。作为极权主义标志的恐怖手段在整个80年代显著减少。然而，党仍然保留着对特定群体使用恐怖手段（例如邓小平1983年严厉的反犯罪运动）或镇压民主力量（例如1989年的天安门事件）的能力。

The only area in which the reforms of the 1980s substantially undermined party control was the economy. The rapid growth of the private sector broke the party-state's monopolistic control of the economy and fueled hopes that the growth and consolidation of a market economy would not only spur modernization but also deconcentrate vital resources away from the state. Yet, the experience of the post-Tiananmen decades reveals the limits of capitalist economic modernization in promoting political change. Despite sustained double-digit growth over a period of twenty years (1992-2012) and the emergence of the private sector as the largest contributor to economic output, the party's hold on power showed no signs of weakening. If anything, the party not only gained legitimacy from the ever-rising living standards but also acquired greater capabilities of control and coercion to defend its political monopoly.

20世纪80年代的改革唯一实质性削弱党控制的领域是经济。私营部门的快速增长打破了党国对经济的垄断，并燃起了人们的希望：市场经济的增长和巩固不仅能促进现代化，还能使重要资源不再集中于国家。然而，后天安门时代的经验表明，资本主义经济现代化在推动政治变革方面存在局限性。尽管在20年间（1992-2012年）经济持续保持两位数增长，私营部门也成为经济产出的最大贡献者，但党的权力却丝毫没有减弱的迹象。相反，党不仅从不断提高的生活水平中获得了合法性，而且还获得了更强大的控制和强制能力来捍卫其政治垄断地位。





2 Reform and Growth in the 1980s





20世纪80年代的改革与增长


MOST ACCOUNTS OF China's post-Mao economic history characterize gradualism as a deliberate decision made by its leaders to avoid initial costly mistakes.1 As with most conventional wisdom, this observation is partly true. This narrative, however, obviously downplays the fact that the party decided to pursue a cautious and incremental course of reform because opposition by hard-liners made it impossible to undertake more radical reforms. More critically, once Deng Xiaoping decided to rely on capitalist tools to save the CCP, the actual range of choices for economic reform strategy was limited. Stated simply, a full and unconditional embrace of a market economy was out of the question politically because this would entail the demolition of the economic foundations of one-party rule. This danger did not deter Deng from courting capitalism in the 1980s because he was willing to try anything to salvage a regime devastated by three decades of Maoist misrule, but the threat of a decentralized market economy to one-party rule would mushroom decades later as the private sector overtook the state sector as the most dynamic economic force.

大多数关于中国后毛泽东时代经济史的论述都将渐进主义描述为领导人为避免初期代价高昂的错误而做出的深思熟虑的决定。1 与大多数传统观点一样，这种说法有一定道理。然而，这种叙述显然淡化了一个事实：中共之所以决定采取谨慎渐进的改革路线，是因为强硬派的反对使得更激进的改革成为不可能。更重要的是，一旦邓小平决定依靠资本主义工具来挽救中共，经济改革战略的实际选择范围就受到了限制。简而言之，全面无条件地拥抱市场经济在政治上是不可行的，因为这将意味着摧毁一党专政的经济基础。这种危险并没有阻止邓小平在 20 世纪 80 年代拥抱资本主义，因为他愿意尝试任何方法来挽救一个被毛泽东时代三十年错误统治摧毁的政权，但分散的市场经济对一党专政的威胁在几十年后才会迅速增长，因为私营部门取代了国有部门，成为最具活力的经济力量。

In the 1980s, fortunately, the prospect of a capitalist subversion of the CCP's political monopoly seemed so unreal that, despite staunch conservative opposition, the party went along with Deng and opened the door for domestic private entrepreneurs and foreign investors. What the party did not foresee was how fast capitalism would grow and thrive in a semihostile environment. Unfortunately, the logic of path dependence also means that the party's half-hearted embrace of capitalism would set firm boundaries for the reach of the market and preserve the regime's control of what Vladimir Lenin called the "commanding heights" of the economy. The resultant hybrid economy would eventually exhaust its initial dynamism and begin to ossify and stagnate.

幸运的是，在20世纪80年代，资本主义颠覆中共政治垄断的前景似乎遥不可及，因此，尽管保守派强烈反对，中共还是顺应了邓小平的指示，向国内私营企业家和外国投资者敞开了大门。然而，中共没有预料到的是，资本主义在这种半敌对的环境下会发展得如此迅速。不幸的是，路径依赖的逻辑也意味着，中共对资本主义的半心半意的接纳，将为市场的发展范围设定严格的界限，并维护政权对列宁所说的经济“制高点”的控制。由此产生的混合经济最终会耗尽其最初的活力，开始僵化和停滞。

The emergence of China's hybrid economic system in the 1980s can be divided into two phases. The most important achievement in first phase, 1979-1983, was the rapid decollectivization of agriculture. This breakthrough not only raised rural productivity and output dramatically but also paved the way for the rise of a dynamic private sector and established the foundations of China's dual-track economy: a highly efficient private sector alongside an inefficient state-owned sector. Reform of the urban sector, where the economy was dominated by the state-owned enterprises, began tentatively in this period and made no meaningful progress. In this phase, reformers led by Deng Xiaoping also launched "opening"—integration with the global economy through attracting foreign direct investment and promoting foreign trade. Compared with the successes of rural reform and the opening to the outside world achieved in the first phase, the second phase, 1984-1989, delivered far less impressive reform outcomes mainly because of the complex challenges of reforming SOEs, growing conservative resistance, and Deng Xiaoping's dismissal of the party's general secretary Hu Yaobang in January 1987, a move that seriously weakened the reformist camp at the top.

20世纪80年代中国混合经济体制的形成可以分为两个阶段。第一阶段（1979-1983年）最重要的成就是农业的快速非集体化。这一突破不仅大幅提高了农村生产率和产出，而且为充满活力的私营经济的崛起铺平了道路，奠定了中国双轨经济的基础：高效的私营经济与效率较低的国有经济并存。在此期间，以国有企业为主导的城镇经济改革开始试探性地进行，但并未取得实质性进展。在这一阶段，以邓小平为首的改革派还启动了“对外开放”——通过吸引外商直接投资和促进对外贸易，融入全球经济。与第一阶段农村改革和对外开放取得的成功相比，第二阶段（1984-1989 年）的改革成果远不如第一阶段显著，这主要是由于国有企业改革面临诸多复杂挑战、保守势力日益增长的阻力，以及邓小平在 1987 年 1 月解除中共中央总书记胡耀邦的职务，这一举动严重削弱了高层改革派的力量。

In spite of China's failure to reform its large and inefficient state-owned sector in the second phase, it built the foundations of sustained rapid growth in the 1980s, thanks to the rapid growth of the private sector and foreign-invested firms. Ironically, this development, especially the rise of a vibrant domestic private sector, was not the planned outcome of Deng's reform. Due to political opposition and the technical difficulties in reforming SOEs, reformers wisely opted for the path of least resistance: liberalizing the economy to bring into the marketplace far more efficient nonstate firms as the new engines of growth. Political expediency aside, this pragmatic approach to reform was also made possible by, paradoxically, the absence of a clear and comprehensive strategy to transform a state-socialist economy into a market-oriented one. Instead of following a rigid approach, Chinese reformers relied on learning-by-doing and avoided making costly mistakes in the early phase of the transition that could doom the entire enterprise.

尽管中国在第二阶段未能成功改革其庞大而低效的国有部门，但得益于私营企业和外商投资企业的快速发展，中国在20世纪80年代奠定了持续快速增长的基础。具有讽刺意味的是，这一发展，尤其是充满活力的国内私营企业的崛起，并非邓小平改革的预期结果。由于政治阻力和国有企业改革的技术难题，改革者明智地选择了阻力最小的道路：开放经济，将效率更高的非国有企业引入市场，作为新的增长引擎。撇开政治权宜之计不谈，这种务实的改革方式之所以成为可能，也恰恰是因为缺乏将国家社会主义经济转型为市场经济的清晰全面的战略。中国改革者没有采取僵化的方式，而是依靠实践经验，避免在转型初期犯下可能危及整个改革进程的代价高昂的错误。





Origins of Chinese Experimentalism





中国实验主义的起源


When China began to reform its economic system in the early 1980s, its leaders were in unchartered territory as they could not draw much guidance from economic theory or real-world examples.2 The neoclassical economic literature was irrelevant for a country embarked on a transition from a nonmarket economy to another system. The experience of limited economic reform in Eastern Europe (mainly Hungary and Yugoslavia) in the 1960s and 1970s was only marginally useful because these efforts focused on SOEs and ultimately failed to produce meaningful economic improvements.

20世纪80年代初，中国开始改革经济体制时，其领导人面临着前所未有的挑战，因为他们既无法从经济理论中汲取太多经验，也无法从现实案例中借鉴太多。新古典经济学的理论对于一个正从非市场经济向市场经济转型的国家而言已不再适用。20世纪60年代和70年代东欧（主要是匈牙利和南斯拉夫）有限的经济改革经验也仅有微弱的借鉴意义，因为这些改革主要集中在国有企业，最终未能带来实质性的经济改善。

However, what Chinese policymakers lacked in theory was more than compensated for by their overriding political imperatives and pragmatic instincts. Politically, the top leaders knew they must produce higher growth to bolster CCP legitimacy after decades of economic mismanagement under Mao. Deng Xiaoping put it bluntly in October 1979: "Economic work is the greatest politics today. The economic issue is the overwhelming political issue."3 As for how to achieve this objective, Deng's answer was straightforward, though it lacked specifics: "The goal of our revolution is to liberate and develop productivity."4

然而，中国决策者在理论上的不足，被其迫切的政治需要和务实的本能所弥补。在政治上，最高领导人深知，在毛泽东时代数十年的经济管理不善之后，他们必须实现更高的经济增长，以巩固中共的合法性。邓小平在1979年10月直言不讳地指出：“经济工作是当今最大的政治，经济问题是压倒一切的政治问题。”至于如何实现这一目标，邓小平的回答虽然缺乏具体细节，但却十分直接：“我们革命的目标是解放和发展生产力。”

To "liberate productivity," China's initial efforts were focused on making the existing system more efficient mainly through decentralization, instead of replacing it altogether. Starting in 1979, decentralization consisted of granting local governments more autonomy in economic management and incentivizing them with "fiscal contracting." This allowed provincial governments to retain surplus revenues after they met the quota of tax revenues to be paid to the central government.5 The pragmatic instincts of the Chinese leaders led them to prefer experimental measures to decisive but risky steps. This cautious approach was necessitated by both opposition from conservatives resisting full liberalization and a lack of the requisite knowledge or theoretical guidance. Consequently, reform measures were rolled out gradually, typically first in a small number of localities to gain valuable knowledge and avoid pitfalls.6 One such example was the economic opening to the West, which occurred through a series of cautious reforms, such as the establishment of four SEZs in Guangdong and Fujian in the early 1980s, the gradual extension of policies to key coastal cities, and piecemeal reforms of the foreign trade regime. Another example is the price reform of the 1980s, which started with a unique "dual-track" pricing system featuring both government-mandated prices and market-determined prices.7 The only big-bang reform breakthrough—in agriculture—occurred not because of a deliberate strategy by the top leadership but because of a combination of bottom-up peasant initiatives and support by reformers in a few key provinces in 1979.8

为了“解放生产力”，中国最初的努力重点在于通过权力下放来提高现有体制的效率，而不是彻底取代它。从1979年开始，权力下放体现在赋予地方政府更大的经济管理自主权，并通过“财政契约”激励它们。这使得省级政府在达到上缴中央的税收配额后，可以保留剩余财政收入。中国领导人的务实精神使他们倾向于采取试验性措施，而不是果断但风险较高的举措。这种谨慎的做法既是由于保守派反对全面自由化，也是由于缺乏必要的知识或理论指导。因此，改革措施逐步推行，通常先在少数地区试点，以积累宝贵经验并避免失误。6 其中一个例子是对外开放经济，这是通过一系列谨慎的改革实现的，例如20世纪80年代初在广东和福建设立四个经济特区，逐步将政策扩展到沿海重点城市，以及对对外贸易体制进行分阶段改革。另一个例子是20世纪80年代的价格改革，其开端是独特的“双轨制”定价体系，既有政府规定的价格，也有市场决定的价格。7 唯一一次重大改革突破——农业改革——并非源于最高领导层的深思熟虑，而是1979年几个重点省份自下而上的农民倡议和改革者支持共同作用的结果。8

Although it is common to credit China's "learn-by-doing" strategy of the 1980s for the initial success of its economic reform, it would be unfair to dismiss the influence of ideas and lessons from Eastern Europe and the West in helping Chinese policymakers and economists gain a deeper and more sophisticated understanding of the nature, scope, and challenges of their tasks. If anything, one of China's initial moves was to dispatch a number of senior officials and economists to visit countries in Eastern Europe, Western Europe, and East Asia to gain useful lessons, insights, and knowledge about economic reform.9 The World Bank, eager to help chart China's course, provided invaluable technical assistance. The head of the bank's office in Beijing organized seminars for technocrats and rising economists in the Chinese government. The most influential event was a seven-day seminar on a cruise along the Yangtze in September 1985 attended by prominent economists from Eastern Europe and the West. Many of the Chinese participants in the seminar later became influential players in the Chinese reform, such as Wu Jinglian, Gao Shangquan, Guo Shuqing, and Lou Jiwei. Impressed by the value of the World Bank's technical assistance, in 1983 Deng invited the bank to conduct a comprehensive study of the Chinese economy and identify the policy choices it faced. This led to a milestone study by the World Bank, published in 1985 and titled "Issues and Choices for Long-Term Development," which drew heavily on the bank's knowledge of developing economies.10

尽管人们普遍认为中国20世纪80年代的“边做边学”战略是其经济改革初期取得成功的关键，但如果忽视东欧和西方的思想和经验对中国决策者和经济学家理解其任务的性质、范围和挑战所产生的影响，那就太不公平了。事实上，中国最初的举措之一就是派遣多位高级官员和经济学家访问东欧、西欧和东亚国家，以获取有关经济改革的宝贵经验、见解和知识。世界银行积极帮助中国规划发展方向，提供了宝贵的技术援助。世界银行驻北京办事处主任为中国政府的技术官僚和新兴经济学家组织了研讨会。其中最具影响力的活动是1985年9月在长江游轮上举行的为期七天的研讨会，来自东欧和西方的著名经济学家出席了此次研讨会。研讨会上的许多中国与会者后来都成为了中国改革开放的重要人物，例如吴敬莲、高尚泉、郭树清和楼继伟。邓小平对世界银行的技术援助印象深刻，于1983年邀请世界银行对中国经济进行全面研究，并确定其面临的政策选择。这促成了世界银行一项里程碑式的研究成果的诞生，该研究于1985年出版，题为《长期发展的议题与选择》，其中大量借鉴了世界银行在发展中经济体方面的知识。

Gradually and cumulatively, these intellectual interactions, especially those with Eastern European economists (the most influential were Janos Kornai from Hungary, Włodzimierz Brus from Poland, and Ota Šik from Czechoslovakia), led some Chinese reformers to conclude that economic reform was "not a collection of random policies" but a "systemic transition."

逐渐地，这些思想交流，特别是与东欧经济学家（其中最有影响力的是匈牙利的亚诺什·科尔奈、波兰的弗沃齐米日·布鲁斯和捷克斯洛伐克的奥塔·希克）的交流，使一些中国改革者得出结论：经济改革“不是一系列随机政策的集合”，而是一个“系统性转型”。

Decentralization and liberalization, hallmarks of the gradualist reform in the 1980s, were too limited to achieve a transition to a different economic system. Consequently, Chinese reformers began to look elsewhere for insights and inspirations. Two models—the Western liberal model and the East Asian developmental state model—began to gain influence. For Deng, the East Asian model held stronger appeal because of the leading role played by an authoritarian state.11

20世纪80年代渐进式改革的标志——权力下放和自由化——过于局限，不足以实现向不同经济体制的转型。因此，中国改革者开始从其他地方寻求借鉴和灵感。西方自由主义模式和东亚发展型国家模式开始受到关注。对邓小平而言，东亚模式更具吸引力，因为其中存在一个威权国家发挥主导作用。

This brief account of the evolution of China's economic reform strategy shows that in the 1980s China mainly followed an experimental and improvisational approach, appropriately captured by the idiom, "crossing the river by feeling for the stones." But Chinese leaders adopted this largely successful strategy out of necessity. The top leaders were divided about the goal and pace of reform, and even those committed to reform lacked the necessary intellectual tools or real-world models. Fortunately, interactions with their counterparts in the West and Eastern Europe helped Chinese economists realize the limits of piecemeal experiments and administrative decentralization and led them to gravitate toward a far more comprehensive and coherent strategy of transition. Because of the post-Tiananmen political turmoil and the brief conservative backlash against reform during 1990-1991, China would have to wait until after Deng's historic southern tour in 1992 to implement a full package of institutional reforms that marked the beginning of a qualitatively different phase of its transition.

这段对中国经济改革战略演变的简要回顾表明，20世纪80年代，中国主要采取的是一种实验性和摸索性的方式，正如“摸着石头过河”这句成语所贴切地概括的那样。但中国领导人采取这种在很大程度上成功的战略是出于无奈。高层领导人在改革的目标和步伐上存在分歧，即使是那些致力于改革的人也缺乏必要的理论工具或现实案例。幸运的是，与东西欧同行的交流帮助中国经济学家认识到零散实验和行政权力下放的局限性，并促使他们转向一种更为全面和连贯的转型战略。由于天安门事件后的政治动荡以及1990-1991年间保守派对改革的短暂反弹，中国不得不等到1992年邓小平历史性的南巡之后，才得以实施一整套制度改革，这标志着中国转型进入了一个截然不同的阶段。





Rural Breakthroughs





乡村突破


When CCP leaders pivoted away from Maoist class struggle to economic modernization in 1979, one of the strategic choices they faced was where economic reform should begin. At that time, the Chinese economic structure was severely distorted in terms of population and output. The countryside contained 82 percent of the population in 1978, but the rural sector accounted for only 28 percent of economic output. In other words, China was both under-urbanized and highly industrialized (with industry producing 48 percent of output in 1978).12 Economically, it might appear that reforming the industrial sector, the largest contributor to economic output, could deliver faster and better results.

1979年，中共领导人将重心从毛泽东时代的阶级斗争转向经济现代化时，他们面临的战略选择之一就是经济改革应该从何处着手。当时，中国的经济结构在人口和产出方面严重失衡。1978年，农村人口占全国总人口的82%，但农村经济产出仅占28%。换言之，当时的中国既是城镇化程度低的，又是高度工业化的（1978年工业产出占全国总产出的48%）。从经济角度来看，改革对经济产出贡献最大的工业部门似乎能够更快、更好地取得成效。

However, reform in China started not in the urban industrial sector but in the impoverished countryside. Reforming the industrial sector based in urban areas might have appeared to be a promising way to improve performance and produce a bigger bang, but political resistance to reform in the SOE-dominated industrial sector was strong. Technically, industrial reform was also far more complex, entailing not only changes in firm management and ownership but also a whole set of complementary institutional reforms involving prices, financial markets, and social safety nets.

然而，中国的改革并非始于城市工业部门，而是始于贫困的农村。改革以城市工业部门为主导的产业部门，看似是提升绩效、产生更大效益的有效途径，但国有企业主导的工业部门改革却面临着强大的政治阻力。从技术层面来看，产业改革也更为复杂，不仅涉及企业管理和所有权的变革，还包括一系列配套的制度改革，涵盖价格、金融市场和社会保障体系等领域。

If political opposition and technical challenges made rural reform more attractive than industrial reform, one might have expected the top party leaders to proactively pursue this route in 1979 or the early 1980s. But they did not. Rural reform began mainly as a bottom-up revolution waged by long-suffering peasants who received, in its early days, the support of only a small number of provincial party leaders, most notably Wan Li in Anhui and Zhao Ziyang in Sichuan. In fact, the CCP Central Committee issued a rural policy directive in September 1979 that explicitly discouraged decollectivization.13 Opponents to rural reform included Hua Guofeng, who was still nominal party chairman, Li Xiannian and Hu Qiaomu, two hard-liners who consistently opposed economic reform in the 1980s, and a large number of provincial party chiefs. Chen Yun, the conservative standard bearer, was neutral, however. From the very beginning, Hu Yaobang was the most enthusiastic supporter of rural reform among the top leaders. Deng supported the "household responsibility system," the rural reform that effectively decollectivized agriculture, but he did not publicly endorse the reform until May 1980.14 According to Zhao Ziyang, Deng's tacit support was critical to the success of the rural reform because it prevented the emergence of unified opposition among the party's top echelon.15 The party did not formally approve the household responsibility system until the beginning of 1982.16

如果政治阻力和技术挑战使得农村改革比产业改革更具吸引力，人们或许会预期中共高层领导人在1979年或20世纪80年代初会积极推行产业改革。但事实并非如此。农村改革最初主要是一场自下而上的革命，由长期遭受苦难的农民发起，早期仅得到少数省级党政领导人的支持，其中最著名的是安徽省的万里和四川省的赵紫阳。事实上，中共中央在1979年9月发布的农村政策指示中明确反对去集体化。反对农村改革的人包括当时名义上仍是中共中央主席的华国锋、李先念和胡巧木这两位在20世纪80年代一直反对经济改革的强硬派，以及众多省级党政干部。然而，保守派领军人物陈云则保持中立。从一开始，胡耀邦就是高层领导人中最热衷于农村改革的人。邓小平支持“家庭联产承包责任制”，这项农村改革有效地实现了农业的非集体化，但他直到1980年5月才公开支持这项改革。赵紫阳认为，邓小平的默许对农村改革的成功至关重要，因为它阻止了党内高层出现统一的反对声音。直到1982年初，党才正式批准家庭联产承包责任制。

Judging by the speed and scope of agricultural decollectivization, which began in 1978 and was completed throughout the country by 1982, rural reform should be considered a radical big bang in one of the most important economic sectors.17 Although China's post-Mao economic reform is often characterized as a case of "gradualism," in reality the country experienced both a "big bang" and a gradualist course of reform. China's big-bang approach to agricultural reform was feasible and successful mostly because the state-socialist system was less deeply entrenched in the countryside, and collectivized agriculture had victimized almost the entire rural population. By comparison, strong political opposition at the top, groups benefiting from a command economy (planners, managers, and workers in SOEs), and genuine technical difficulties of industrial reform compelled China to adopt a more cautious step-by-step approach in this area.

从1978年开始、1982年全国范围内完成的农业非集体化的速度和范围来看，农村改革应被视为最重要的经济部门之一的一次彻底变革。尽管中国后毛泽东时代的经济改革常被描述为“渐进主义”，但实际上，中国经历了“大爆炸”式和渐进式的双重改革路径。中国农业改革的“大爆炸”式路径之所以可行且成功，主要是因为国家社会主义制度在农村的根基较浅，而且集体化农业几乎使全体农村人口都深受其害。相比之下，来自高层的强大政治阻力、从计划经济中获益的群体（国有企业的计划者、管理者和工人）以及工业改革中存在的切实技术难题，迫使中国在该领域采取更为谨慎的循序渐进的方式。

The end of collectivized agriculture produced an instant increase in productivity. Agricultural output, measured in constant prices, rose an average of 8.7 percent annually between 1979 and 1984.18 Academic studies show that a radical institutional change—replacing the Maoist people's communes with private household farming—contributed at least half of output growth in the agricultural sector during this period.19 The rural breakthrough in the early 1980s had vast—and positive—implications for Deng's reform. The rapid gains in productivity and standard of living due to agricultural decollectivization generated valuable political capital for the reformers as rural per capita income grew threefold from 1978 to 1985 in real terms.20 Few appreciated the political benefits of the early success of reform in the rural sector as acutely as Deng, who said in 1985, "To make our domestic economy dynamic, we must start with the countryside. Eighty percent of the Chinese population is in the countryside. Whether Chinese society can be stable and the Chinese economy can develop depends on whether the countryside can develop and the life of peasants can improve."21

集体化农业的终结带来了生产力的立竿见影的提升。1979年至1984年间，按不变价格计算的农业产出年均增长8.7%。学术研究表明，这一时期农业产出增长的至少一半是由一项根本性的制度变革——以私人家庭农场取代毛泽东时代的人民公社——所贡献的。20世纪80年代初的农村突破对邓小平的改革产生了深远而积极的影响。农业非集体化带来的生产力和生活水平的快速提高，为改革者积累了宝贵的政治资本，1978年至1985年间，农村人均收入实际增长了三倍。邓小平对农村改革早期成功所带来的政治利益有着极其深刻的认识，他在1985年指出：“要使国内经济充满活力，必须从农村做起。中国80%的人口在农村。中国社会能否稳定、中国经济能否发展，取决于农村能否发展、农民生活能否改善。”

More important, liberation of the peasantry from the yokes of the people's communes was the first step in creating a private sector, which later became the most dynamic engine of growth. The connection between decollectivization and the private sector became obvious only in hindsight. In reality, the emergence of the private sector in the countryside during the post-Mao era was an inevitable outcome of the successful rural reform. Increased productivity and output freed up a huge amount of labor and allowed peasants to accumulate savings to finance nonagricultural activities, thus creating two necessary conditions for a nascent private sector: entrepreneurs and capital.

更重要的是，农民从人民公社的枷锁中解放出来，是建立私营部门的第一步，而私营部门后来成为经济增长最强劲的引擎。去集体化与私营部门之间的联系，只有在事后看来才显而易见。事实上，后毛泽东时代农村私营部门的出现，是农村改革成功的必然结果。生产力和产量的提高释放了大量劳动力，使农民能够积累储蓄，用于非农活动，从而为新兴的私营部门创造了两个必要条件：企业家和资本。

The dismantling of the communes opened up an unanticipated opportunity for rural entrepreneurs because the communes had accumulated considerable industrial assets during the Great Leap Forward (1958-1959) and the agricultural mechanization campaign in the Cultural Revolution. After the communes disappeared, some of these assets were effectively privatized (usually in the form of leasing), while others were transferred to newly formed collective firms that were nominally owned by township and village governments. This development laid the early foundations for China's township and village enterprises.22

人民公社的解散为农村企业家带来了意想不到的机遇，因为人民公社在大跃进（1958-1959）和文化大革命的农业机械化运动中积累了大量工业资产。公社解散后，部分资产实际上被私有化（通常以租赁的形式），而其他资产则被转移到新成立的集体企业中，这些企业名义上由乡镇和村政府所有。这一发展为中国乡镇和村级企业的早期发展奠定了基础。

Several other factors also contributed to the rapid growth of the TVEs. Due to fiscal decentralization in the early 1980s, local authorities had strong incentives to support industrial growth in their respective areas because nonagricultural activities generated more tax revenues.23 The neglect of light industry and the service sector in favor of defense-related heavy industry during the Maoist period also meant that there was a severe shortage of consumer goods and services, which presented a huge opportunity to be exploited by rural entrepreneurs. Consequently, the market-oriented TVEs quickly gained a competitive edge over the SOEs in supplying consumer goods and services. They also began to contribute a rising share of Chinese exports.24

其他几个因素也促成了乡镇企业的快速发展。由于20世纪80年代初的财政分权，地方政府更有动力支持本地区的工业发展，因为非农活动能带来更多税收。毛泽东时代，轻工业和服务业被忽视，而国防相关重工业则被优先发展，这导致消费品和服务严重短缺，为农村企业家提供了巨大的发展机遇。因此，以市场为导向的乡镇企业在消费品和服务供应方面迅速获得了相对于国有企业的竞争优势，并且在中国出口中所占的份额也越来越大。

Policy support from Beijing mainly consisted of allowing rural entrepreneurs access to rural credit co-ops and informal financing.25 The dual-track price reform, however imperfect, allowed TVEs to purchase vital inputs legally because this reform encouraged SOEs, which monopolized the production of steel, aluminum, chemicals, and other upstream materials used for the manufacturing of consumer goods, to sell their products to TVEs at higher, market-based prices.26

北京的政策支持主要体现在允许农村企业家获得农村信贷合作社和非正规融资渠道。尽管双轨价格改革并不完善，但它使乡镇企业能够合法地购买关键投入品，因为这项改革鼓励垄断钢铁、铝、化工产品和其他消费品制造上游原材料生产的国有企业以更高的市场价格向乡镇企业出售产品。

The explosive growth of TVEs in the 1980s (table 2.1) was a positive development totally unanticipated by even the most ardent reformers. Deng admitted in 1987 that "our greatest success—and it is one we had by no means anticipated—has been the emergence of a large number of enterprises run by villages and townships. They were like a new force that just came into being spontaneously. . . . The Central Committee takes no credit.27

20世纪80年代乡镇企业的爆炸式增长（表2.1）是一个积极的发展，即使是最热忱的改革者也始料未及。邓小平在1987年承认：“我们最大的成就——也是我们始料未及的——是大量乡镇企业涌现。它们就像一股自发形成的新力量……中央委员会不居功。”

TABLE 2.1. Growth of the TVEs in the 1980s

表 2.1. 20 世纪 80 年代 TVE 的增长情况

Source: ZGTJNJ 1995, 363-65.

来源：ZGTJNJ 1995，363-65。



Because the TVEs were officially designated as "collective" firms owned not by the state or private individuals but by a local collective entity, such as a village or township, one may have the impression that they were not genuine private firms. In fact, however, many were bona fide private firms despite the designation of "collective firms" because the latter provided more political protection in an era when private ownership of property was not officially endorsed by the party or legally protected by the Chinese constitution (the constitution was not amended until 2004 to protect private property). Research by Yasheng Huang shows that by 1987, private TVEs accounted for half of the output of all TVEs in eight provinces and 30-50 percent of the output of TVEs in fifteen provinces. In 1989 private TVEs contributed 58 percent of after-tax profits of all TVEs and accounted for 45 percent of the wage bill of all TVEs.28

由于乡镇企业被官方认定为“集体所有制”企业，其所有权并非归国家或私人所有，而是由村、乡等地方集体实体所有，因此人们可能会误以为它们并非真正的私营企业。然而，事实上，尽管被冠以“集体所有制”之名，许多乡镇企业仍是名副其实的私营企业，因为在当时私有财产所有权尚未得到党的正式认可或宪法保护的年代（直到2004年宪法才进行修订以保护私有财产），后者能提供更多的政治保障。黄亚生的研究表明，到1987年，私营乡镇企业在八个省份的乡镇企业总产值中占比达一半，在十五个省份则占比达30%至50%。1989年，私营乡镇企业贡献了所有乡镇企业税后利润的58%，并占所有乡镇企业工资总额的45%。

Another far-reaching consequence of the TVEs is that they gave rise to a new generation of private entrepreneurs.29 Those who leased the assets of TVEs or later assumed managerial responsibilities in them built thriving private businesses. The most successful became tycoons who led globally competitive firms, such as Fuyao Industrial Glass Group (a global leader of auto glass founded by Cao Dewang) and Wang Xiang Group (an auto parts maker founded by Lu Guanqiu). Entrepreneurs who did not lease or manage TVEs but were able to scrape together enough capital also started businesses that grew into thriving private companies, such as New Hope Group, which began as a small Sichuan company producing animal feed. A government-sponsored study of rural entrepreneurs in 1991 found that 19 percent were the heads of TVEs and 13 percent had at one time worked in TVEs. In other words, roughly one-third of all rural entrepreneurs were connected with the TVEs. Other studies show that between 17 percent and 47 percent of private entrepreneurs had been senior executives or workers in TVEs.30

乡镇企业带来的另一个深远影响是，它们催生了新一代的私营企业家。那些租赁乡镇企业资产或后来接管其管理工作的人，建立了蓬勃发展的私营企业。其中最成功的几位成为了商业巨头，领导着具有全球竞争力的公司，例如曹德旺创立的福耀工业玻璃集团（全球领先的汽车玻璃企业）和陆冠秋创立的王翔集团（汽车零部件制造商）。那些没有租赁或管理乡镇企业，但能够筹集到足够资金的企业家，也创办了企业，并发展成为蓬勃发展的私营公司，例如新希望集团，它最初是一家四川小型饲料生产企业。1991年一项政府资助的农村企业家调查发现，19%的农村企业家是乡镇企业的负责人，13%的农村企业家曾经在乡镇企业工作过。换句话说，大约三分之一的农村企业家与乡镇企业有着联系。其他研究表明，17%至47%的私营企业家曾是传统小型企业的高级管理人员或员工。





Opening to the World





向世界敞开大门


China's economic engagement with the world was miniscule relative to its size due to Mao's policy of "self-reliance." In 1978 total foreign trade was only $20.6 billion, or 10 percent of China's GDP.31 But economic reintegration into the global trading system was crucial to the success of the country's modernization. Deng, who likely acquired a cosmopolitan outlook during his five-year sojourn in France (December 1920 to January 1926), viewed opening as a top priority and subsequently invested enormous political capital to push for reforms to attract foreign capital.32 More than any other Chinese leader at the end of the 1970s, Deng recognized that a favorable external environment, in particular warming ties between China and the West, would provide a window of opportunity. In May 1979, shortly after he reached political supremacy, Deng told a French delegation that "now we enjoy relatively favorable international conditions and can introduce advanced technology, research products, and considerable international capital from the U.S., Europe and Japan. In the first twenty years of the [PRC] we did not have such international conditions. . . . We must adopt a policy of opening."33

由于毛泽东的“自力更生”政策，中国与世界的经济联系相对于其庞大的体量而言微乎其微。1978年，中国对外贸易总额仅为206亿美元，占国内生产总值的10%。但经济重新融入全球贸易体系对于中国现代化的成功至关重要。邓小平在法国的五年旅居生活（1920年12月至1926年1月）很可能培养了国际视野，他将对外开放视为重中之重，并随后投入巨额政治资本推动改革以吸引外资。在20世纪70年代末，邓小平比任何其他中国领导人都更清楚地认识到，有利的外部环境，特别是中西方关系的升温，将为中国带来机遇。 1979年5月，邓小平在掌握政治权力后不久，对一个法国代表团说：“现在我们享有相对有利的国际条件，可以从美国、欧洲和日本引进先进技术、科研成果和大量国际资本。中华人民共和国成立后的前二十年，我们没有这样的国际条件……我们必须采取对外开放的政策。”

In the early years of reform, Deng effectively made himself China's chief salesman to the West. His visits to the United States (in early 1979) and Japan (in October 1978 and February 1979) cemented diplomatic foundations with the two countries that were most critical to Chinese modernization. Deng also carried out a tireless campaign with visiting foreign dignitaries and businessmen to promote his policy of opening. The official chronology of Deng's activities in 1978 shows that during that single year he spoke to thirty-one visiting delegations of foreign businessmen and politicians about his policy of opening. In 1979 he delivered the same message to thirty-five visiting delegations.34

在改革开放初期，邓小平实际上把自己塑造成了中国对外的主要推销员。他于1979年初访问美国，并于1978年10月和1979年2月访问日本，巩固了与这两个对中国现代化至关重要的国家的外交基础。邓小平还孜孜不倦地接待来访的外国政要和商人，宣传他的对外开放政策。1978年官方记录显示，仅这一年，他就接见了31个来访的外国商人和政要代表团，阐述了他的对外开放政策。1979年，他又向35个来访代表团传达了同样的信息。

At the same time, Deng made it clear to the party that opening to the West was integral to his reform agenda, and he repeatedly emphasized that China had to seize this window of opportunity. Speaking to provincial party chiefs in October 1979, Deng devoted an entire section of his talk to foreign investment and trade. "We must utilize foreign capital in whatever form," he stressed. "This is such a rare opportunity and it would be a shame to pass it up. Utilizing foreign capital is a major policy. . . . I believe we should persist. . . . We must encourage exports."35 He was even more explicit a month later: "Achieving the four modernizations requires a correct policy of opening to the outside. Although we will rely mainly on our own efforts, resources, and foundations, [the four modernizations] would not be possible without international cooperation.36 An important reason why China had remained backward economically, according to Deng, was "its policy of closing the country to outside contact. Our experience shows that China cannot rebuild itself behind closed doors."37

与此同时，邓小平向党内明确表示，对外开放是其改革议程的重要组成部分，并反复强调中国必须抓住这一机遇。1979年10月，邓小平在与各省委书记的讲话中，专门用一个章节论述了对外投资和贸易。“我们必须以各种形式利用外资，”他强调说，“这是一个千载难逢的机会，错过实在可惜。利用外资是一项重大政策……我认为我们应该坚持下去……我们必须鼓励出口。”一个月后，他的表态更加明确：“实现四个现代化需要正确的对外开放政策。虽然我们将主要依靠自身的努力、资源和基础，但没有国际合作，（四个现代化）是不可能实现的。”邓小平认为，中国经济落后的一个重要原因是“其闭关锁国的政策”。我们的经验表明，中国无法闭门重建。

Politically, it is not difficult to see why Deng prioritized opening. He was more directly involved personally in promoting policies to attract foreign investment and increase exports than he was in pushing for domestic reform. Also, domestic economic reform faced greater political resistance because it threatened entrenched interest groups, such as those in the state-owned sector. Outside the agricultural sector, which was quickly privatized, radical reform in urban areas would also encounter more practical difficulties and entail greater political risks. For example, restructuring the money-losing SOEs through bankruptcy or privatization would need new legal tools and a functioning capital market, which China still lacked in the early 1980s.38 In the meantime, price reform, which could unleash temporary inflation, was politically risky. As an astute practitioner of geopolitics, Deng took full advantage of China's crucial role as a counterweight to the Soviet Union during the Cold War to reap substantive economic benefits from the West, in particular capital, technology, and access to markets. Given the overwhelming political logic for opening, Deng lent his support to a series of reforms to attract foreign investment and increase Chinese exports.

从政治角度来看，不难理解邓小平为何优先考虑对外开放。他本人更多地参与推动吸引外资和增加出口的政策，而非推动国内改革。此外，国内经济改革面临更大的政治阻力，因为它威胁到根深蒂固的利益集团，例如国有企业。除了迅速私有化的农业部门外，城市地区的激进改革也会遇到更多实际困难，并带来更大的政治风险。例如，通过破产或私有化重组亏损的国有企业需要新的法律工具和运转良好的资本市场，而中国在20世纪80年代初仍然缺乏这些。与此同时，可能引发暂时性通货膨胀的价格改革在政治上也存在风险。作为一位精明的地缘政治家，邓小平充分利用了中国在冷战期间作为制衡苏联的关键作用，从西方获得了实质性的经济利益，特别是资本、技术和市场准入。鉴于对外开放的压倒性政治逻辑，邓小平支持了一系列旨在吸引外资、增加中国出口的改革。





Legislation to Attract Foreign Direct Investment





吸引外国直接投资的立法


Topping Deng's agenda to attract foreign capital was establishment of a legal framework. In May 1979 he told a delegation of Japanese legislators that China was considering setting up joint ventures with foreign investors and passing a law on foreign investment to underscore its policy of opening. He listed a set of laws on patents and international trade that would also need to be enacted.39 In July 1979 the NPC passed the historic "Chinese-Foreign Equity Joint Ventures Law" to create a legal framework for allowing foreign investors to operate in China. Among other things, the law stipulated that a foreign partner had to put up at least 25 percent of the equity in a joint venture. Although the law did not limit the total amount of equity the foreign partners could invest, the practice was that their total contribution was not to exceed 50 percent of the equity. (The draft of the law sought to explicitly limit the amount of equity of foreign investors to 49 percent, thus making the foreign investors minority owners, but Deng quashed the idea after learning that such a provision was not an international norm.)40

邓小平吸引外资的首要任务是建立法律框架。1979年5月，他告诉日本议员代表团，中国正在考虑与外国投资者成立合资企业，并制定外商投资法，以强调其对外开放政策。他还列举了一系列关于专利和国际贸易的法律，这些法律也需要制定。1979年7月，全国人大通过了具有里程碑意义的《中外合资企业法》，为外国投资者在中国经营创造了法律框架。该法规定，外国合伙人在合资企业中至少要出资25%的股权。虽然该法没有限制外国合伙人可以投资的股权总额，但实践中，他们的出资总额通常不超过股权的50%。 （该法律草案试图明确限制外国投资者的股权比例为49%，从而使外国投资者成为少数股东，但邓小平在得知此类规定并非国际惯例后否决了这一想法。）

Foreign joint ventures were encouraged to source local materials, bring in advanced technology, and export their products in exchange for tax benefits. The Chinese partners could contribute land as part of their equity (the law would later be revised on three occasions before it was annulled in 2020).41

鼓励外国合资企业采购本地原材料、引进先进技术并出口产品，以换取税收优惠。中国合作伙伴可以出资土地作为股权的一部分（该法律后来经过三次修订，最终于2020年被废止）。

Although it did not offer substantial benefits to foreign investors, who often found the law's provisions restrictive and vague, it nevertheless signaled China's desire to welcome foreign capital and opened the door slightly for foreign investors to enter a potentially huge market that had long been closed to the outside world. (Deng said that, despite its flaws, the law was a statement of "our political desires and goals.")42

尽管该法并未给外国投资者带来实质性好处（他们往往觉得该法的条款限制性强且含糊不清），但它仍然表明了中国欢迎外资的意愿，并为外国投资者进入一个长期以来对外界封闭的潜在巨大市场打开了一扇大门。（邓小平表示，尽管存在缺陷，但该法体现了“我们的政治愿望和目标”。）

The second law, promulgated by the NPC in 1986, most likely to make foreign investment even more attractive than joint ventures, was the "Foreign-Capital Enterprises Law," which allowed foreign investors to set up wholly owned firms in China. The law included only a small number of general provisions, but, like the law on joint ventures, it encouraged wholly owned foreign firms to introduce advanced technology, source locally, and export their products in exchange for tax benefits.43 The State Council issued a far more detailed regulation on wholly owned foreign firms in 1990, with more specific, but also restrictive, provisions. Most important, foreign investors were allowed to set up wholly owned firms only if (1) they brought in advanced technology and equipment; (2) they could manufacture products to substitute imports; or (3) they could earn enough hard currency to cover their foreign exchange expenses.

第二部法律是全国人大于1986年颁布的《外商投资企业法》，这部法律很可能使外商投资比合资企业更具吸引力。该法允许外国投资者在中国设立独资企业。该法仅包含少量一般性规定，但与合资企业法一样，鼓励外商独资企业引进先进技术、本地采购并出口产品，以换取税收优惠。1990年，国务院颁布了更为详细的关于外商独资企业的规定，其中包含更具体但也更具限制性的规定。最重要的是，外国投资者只有在满足以下条件时才能设立独资企业：（1）引进先进技术和设备；（2）生产可替代进口产品；或（3）赚取足够的硬通货以支付外汇支出。

China also kept many sectors—media, broadcasting, films, domestic retail, foreign trade, insurance, and telecommunications—off-limits to wholly owned foreign firms. Other sectors, such as public utilities, transportation, and real estate, were open to foreign investment but only with severe restrictions. Furthermore, all wholly owned foreign investment was subject to a national security review.44

中国还禁止外商独资企业进入许多行业，例如媒体、广播、电影、国内零售、对外贸易、保险和电信。其他行业，例如公共事业、交通运输和房地产，虽然对外国投资开放，但也受到严格限制。此外，所有外商独资企业都必须接受国家安全审查。

In the late 1980s the Chinese government passed another law, the "Chinese-Foreign Contractual Joint Ventures Law," making it attractive for foreign companies to bring intellectual property rights and management know-how to China in lieu of capital.45 These three laws, which were later revised several times to make them more liberal, laid a legal foundation to attract foreign capital and technology. But based on their still relatively restrictive provisions, which likely reflected both conservative opposition and lingering distrust of foreign capital, it is doubtful that these three laws on their own played a pivotal role in persuading foreign investors to bring their capital to a country that had yet to establish a record as a safe and welcoming place for outsiders. Despite Deng's heroic efforts to welcome foreign investment, only a modest amount of foreign capital actually flowed into China in the 1980s.

20世纪80年代末，中国政府颁布了另一部法律——《中外合资企业法》，旨在吸引外国公司以知识产权和管理经验代替资金投入中国。这三部法律后来经过多次修订，变得更加宽松，为吸引外资和技术奠定了法律基础。但由于其条款仍然相对严格，这可能反映了保守派的反对和对外国资本挥之不去的不信任，因此，这三部法律本身是否在说服外国投资者将资金投入中国方面发挥了关键作用，令人怀疑。毕竟，当时中国尚未树立起安全友好的形象。尽管邓小平为吸引外资做出了巨大努力，但20世纪80年代实际流入中国的外国资本数量仍然有限。





Special Economic Zones





经济特区


A tentative but politically bold step taken by Deng and fellow reformers in the late 1970s was the establishment of SEZs. To be sure, the idea of attracting foreign investors by providing tax benefits and other privileges to set up shop in a designated jurisdiction for export-processing was not a Chinese invention. Taiwan, South Korea, Malaysia, and other countries in Asia had pioneered export-processing zones (EPZs) in the 1960s to promote labor-intensive exports.46 However, for a country with fresh memories of Western "concessions" (areas within China where Westerners had exercised quasi-sovereign control) during the pre-1949 era, the creation of zones that would grant foreign investors privileges that were denied to Chinese people was fraught with political risks.

20世纪70年代末，邓小平及其改革伙伴采取了一项试探性但政治上大胆的举措——设立经济特区。诚然，通过提供税收优惠和其他特权吸引外国投资者在指定区域设立出口加工企业，这种做法并非中国首创。早在20世纪60年代，台湾、韩国、马来西亚和其他亚洲国家就已率先设立出口加工区，以促进劳动密集型出口。然而，对于一个对1949年以前西方“租界”（西方人在中国境内行使准主权控制权的区域）记忆犹新的国家而言，设立给予外国投资者特权而中国公民却无法享受的特区，无疑充满了政治风险。

But the potential ideological and nationalist backlash did not deter Deng. In April 1979 he responded enthusiastically to a proposal made by Xi Zhongxun (then the party chief of Guangdong) and Yang Shangkun (a close ally of Deng) to set up EPZs in Shenzhen, Zhuhai, and Shantou, three underdeveloped areas close to Hong Kong. The only twist was Deng's suggestion that they be called "special zones" (tequ). According to him, the central government would give policy preferences instead of money to attract foreign businesses to these zones. Due to his intervention, in July 1979 the central leadership approved requests from Guangdong and Fujian for special policy treatment and flexibility, and by May 1980 the central government formally approved the establishment of four SEZs—in Shenzhen, Zhuhai, Shantou, and Xiamen.47 Shenzhen was by far the largest: Even though at the time it was only a small fishing village with a population of thirty thousand, the entire territory of over 327 square kilometers was allocated for the SEZ. China made Shenzhen the largest SEZ because it bordered Hong Kong and could attract investment from the then-British colony. The other three SEZs were much smaller: Zhuhai, which bordered Macao, consisted of only 14 square kilometers, and Shantou was only 6 square kilometers. Initially, only one district in Xiamen was designated as an SEZ, but in 1985 the central government expanded the Xiamen SEZ to include the entire city, with 131 square kilometers of land.48

但潜在的意识形态和民族主义反弹并未阻止邓小平。1979年4月，他积极响应了时任广东省委书记习近平和邓小平的亲密盟友杨尚坤提出的在深圳、珠海和汕头这三个靠近香港的欠发达地区设立出口加工区的提议。唯一的不同之处在于，邓小平建议将这些地区称为“特区”。他认为，中央政府将以政策优惠而非资金来吸引外国企业入驻这些特区。由于他的斡旋，1979年7月，中央领导批准了广东和福建提出的特殊政策待遇和灵活性请求。到1980年5月，中央政府正式批准设立四个经济特区——深圳、珠海、汕头和厦门。深圳是其中规模最大的：尽管当时它只是一个拥有三万人口的小渔村，但超过327平方公里的整个区域都被划为经济特区。中国之所以将深圳设立为最大的经济特区，是因为它毗邻香港，可以吸引来自当时英国殖民地香港的投资。其他三个经济特区规模小得多：与澳门接壤的珠海仅有14平方公里，汕头只有6平方公里。最初，厦门只有一个区被划为经济特区，但1985年，中央政府扩大了厦门经济特区的范围，将整个厦门市纳入其中，面积达131平方公里。

The primary objective in establishing the SEZs was to attract FDI and to set up export-processing factories to earn foreign exchange.49 The NPC passed special legislation in August 1980 on Guangdong's SEZs that offered foreign investors favorable tax treatment and operational autonomy. For example, such investors could form wholly owned firms in the SEZs so as to retain full management control, a privilege denied to foreign investors elsewhere in the country. Those firms operating in the SEZs could import their equipment and materials duty-free. Furthermore, their profits would be taxed at only 15 percent, and additional tax subsidies would be made available for firms that invested more than $5 million or reinvested their profits in the SEZs. In return, firms in the SEZs were required to export their products.50

设立经济特区的主要目标是吸引外商直接投资，并建立出口加工厂以赚取外汇。1980年8月，全国人大通过了关于广东省经济特区的特别立法，为外国投资者提供优惠的税收待遇和经营自主权。例如，这些投资者可以在经济特区内设立全资子公司，从而保留完全的管理控制权，这是外国投资者在全国其他地区无法享有的特权。在经济特区内经营的企业可以免税进口设备和原材料。此外，其利润税率仅为15%，对于在经济特区内投资超过500万美元或将利润再投资的企业，还将提供额外的税收补贴。作为回报，经济特区内的企业必须出口其产品。

Despite the enormous attention given to the SEZs, their direct contribution to China's economic development in the 1980s was modest because they were established in underdeveloped jurisdictions (except for Xiamen). In 1980 the four SEZs accounted for only 0.2 percent of China's industrial output. In 1989, although their contribution had grown sixfold, it was still only 1.3 percent of the country's total industrial output. But in many ways the SEZs were stunning economic successes. Their growth was much higher than the national average at the time (Shenzhen's industrial output grew, on average, 20 percent per year between 1981 and 1992, compared with 14 percent for the national average). The SEZs also attracted $4.1 billion in utilized FDI between 1980 and 1989, roughly 26 percent of China's total utilized FDI during the same period.51 Exports from the four SEZs recorded explosive growth in the 1980s. Between 1983 and 1989, exports from these areas rose seventeenfold. Their share of China's total exports grew from 1 percent in 1983 to 6.4 percent in 1989.52 Of all the SEZs, Shenzhen is undoubtedly the greatest success story. Within three decades, it was transformed into a mega-city (with a population of over twelve million in 2020), a manufacturing center of electronics, and a high-tech cluster.53

尽管经济特区备受关注，但由于它们大多设立在欠发达地区（厦门除外），因此在20世纪80年代，它们对中国经济发展的直接贡献有限。1980年，四个经济特区的工业产值仅占中国工业总产值的0.2%。1989年，尽管其贡献增长了六倍，但仍仅占全国工业总产值的1.3%。然而，在许多方面，经济特区都取得了令人瞩目的经济成就。它们的增长速度远高于当时的全国平均水平（1981年至1992年间，深圳的工业产值年均增长20%，而全国平均水平为14%）。 1980年至1989年间，经济特区吸引了41亿美元的外商直接投资，约占同期中国外商直接投资总额的26%。51 20世纪80年代，四个经济特区的出口实现了爆炸式增长。1983年至1989年间，这些地区的出口增长了17倍。它们占中国出口总额的份额从1983年的1%增长到1989年的6.4%。52 在所有经济特区中，深圳无疑是最成功的。短短三十年间，深圳就发展成为一座超级大都市（2020年人口超过1200万）、电子产品制造中心和高科技产业集群。53

Several factors, such as the preferential treatment of foreign capital, local autonomy, and proximity and historical ties to Hong Kong (in the case of Shenzhen) and Taiwan (in the case of Xiamen), lay behind the success of the SEZs. But perhaps the single most important favorable factor was the invisible institutional factor. Specifically, the institutions of the Leninist party-state, in particular the command economy, were the least embedded in the most successful SEZ. (In Shenzhen, the private sector accounted for more than three-quarters of economic output in 1992.) The private sector could flourish without the stifling control of the state, as illustrated by the contrast between two successful SEZs, Shenzhen and Xiamen. In 1980 Shenzhen's industrial output was only 84 million yuan, less than 10 percent of Xiamen's 943 million yuan. But by 1989 Shenzhen's industrial output had risen to 11.6 billion yuan, twice that of Xiamen's industrial output.54

经济特区的成功背后有诸多因素，例如对外国资本的优惠待遇、地方自治以及与香港（深圳）和台湾（厦门）的地理邻近性和历史渊源。但或许最重要的有利因素是无形的制度因素。具体而言，列宁主义党国体制，尤其是计划经济体制，在最成功的经济特区中根深蒂固程度最低。（1992年，深圳私营部门的经济产出占比超过四分之三。）私营部门能够在摆脱国家严密控制的情况下蓬勃发展，深圳和厦门这两个成功的经济特区的对比便是最好的例证。1980年，深圳的工业产值仅为8400万元，不到厦门9.43亿元的10%。但到1989年，深圳的工业产值已增长至116亿元，是厦门的两倍。

In addition to FDI and exports, the SEZs generated substantial intangible and indirect benefits for China. This experiment in opening to the outside world yielded valuable lessons about how to integrate with the global economy via investment and trade. The knowledge gained from this learn-by-doing process gave the reformers, led by Zhao Ziyang, the confidence to turn the entire coastal area into de facto SEZs in the late 1980s (the plan was fully implemented in the 1990s, even after the ouster of Zhao in 1989).55

除了吸引外商直接投资和出口外，经济特区还为中国带来了大量的无形和间接收益。这一对外开放的尝试，为中国如何通过投资和贸易融入全球经济积累了宝贵的经验。从这一实践中汲取的知识，使赵紫阳领导的改革派在20世纪80年代末更有信心将整个沿海地区改造成事实上的经济特区（该计划在20世纪90年代得到全面实施，即便赵紫阳在1989年被罢黜）。





Foreign Trade Reform





对外贸易改革


Integration with the international economy—Deng's "opening"—meant a dramatic rise in China's foreign trade. The country's economic growth could be increased substantially if it took advantage of its comparative advantage in cheap labor and export labor-intensive manufactures.56 During the Maoist era, however, China had pursued a development strategy that favored heavy industry and sought import substitution, contrary to its comparative advantage. More important, China's self-imposed isolation and hostility to both the capitalist West and the Soviet bloc isolated its economy from international trade. In 1978, on the eve of reform, China's foreign trade was only 10 percent of its GDP.57 Even this figure exaggerated China's trade openness because of the significant overvaluation of the Chinese currency. In addition, China's GDP itself was undervalued. If both the GDP and the exchange rates were adjusted using market-based measures, China's trade openness at the start of the reform would have been 5–6 percent of GDP, nearly half of the nominal figure.58

与国际经济一体化——邓小平所说的“开放”——意味着中国对外贸易的大幅增长。如果中国能够利用其廉价劳动力方面的比较优势，出口劳动密集型制成品，其经济增长就能显著提升。然而，在毛泽东时代，中国奉行的发展战略却偏重重工业，并寻求进口替代，这与自身的比较优势背道而驰。更重要的是，中国自我封闭，对资本主义西方和苏联集团都抱有敌意，这使得中国经济与国际贸易隔绝。1978年，改革开放前夕，中国的对外贸易额仅占其GDP的10%。即使是这个数字，由于人民币被严重高估，也夸大了中国的贸易开放程度。此外，中国的GDP本身也被低估了。如果采用市场化方法调整国内生产总值和汇率，中国改革之初的贸易开放度将占国内生产总值的5%至6%，几乎是名义数字的一半。

Ironically, the closed nature of the Chinese economy and its inefficient development strategy that favored capital-intensive heavy industry implied that the country could boost its foreign trade and reap dramatic productivity gains if it reformed its foreign trade system. Parallel to the efforts to attract FDI, Chinese leaders also launched a series of reforms to promote exports and make the foreign trade system more efficient.

具有讽刺意味的是，中国经济的封闭性和其偏重资本密集型重工业的低效发展战略意味着，如果中国改革其对外贸易体制，就能促进对外贸易并取得显著的生产力提升。在努力吸引外商直接投资的同时，中国领导人也启动了一系列改革，以促进出口并提高对外贸易体制的效率。

Because the state monopolized foreign trade through specialized central foreign trade organizations (FTOs), firms could conduct trade only through these monopolies. The first step was to dismantle these monopolies through administrative decentralization. Provincial governments and their FTOs were thus allowed to directly engage in foreign trade. Once the central monopoly was broken, the impact of decentralization was instant and dramatic, as shown by the rapid increase in Chinese foreign trade (table 2.2).59

由于国家通过专门的中央外贸组织（FTO）垄断了对外贸易，企业只能通过这些垄断机构进行贸易。第一步是通过行政权力下放来打破这些垄断。省级政府及其下属的外贸组织由此被允许直接从事对外贸易。中央垄断被打破后，权力下放的影响立竿见影且十分显著，中国对外贸易的快速增长便证明了这一点（表2.2）。

TABLE 2.2. Foreign Trade and Exports, 1978-1988 (in billion USD)

表2.2. 1978-1988年对外贸易和出口（单位：十亿美元）

Source:ZGTJNJ 1990,641.

来源：ZGTJNJ 1990,641。



However, foreign trade reform was no smooth sailing. During the economic retrenchment campaign launched by Chen Yun in 1981-1983, foreign trade was recentralized with a permit system, ostensibly to regulate it and avoid excessive competition among provincial foreign trade firms that depressed the prices of Chinese exports.60 But the conservative backlash fizzled out quickly, and a far more market-oriented round of foreign trade reforms took place in 1984-1986. New measures allowed large firms to directly engage in foreign trade by bypassing the state foreign trade organizations. Additionally, the Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations and Trade (MOFERT) was stripped of its authority to supervise the business activities of local FTOs, which could then become the real middlemen in foreign trade.

然而，外贸改革并非一帆风顺。在陈云于1981年至1983年发起的经济紧缩运动期间，外贸实行了许可证制度，表面上是为了规范外贸，避免省级外贸企业之间过度竞争压低中国出口商品价格。但保守派的反弹很快平息，1984年至1986年，一轮更加市场化的外贸改革接踵而至。新措施允许大型企业绕过国家外贸机构直接从事外贸活动。此外，对外经济贸易部也被剥夺了对地方外贸企业经营活动的监管权，这些企业由此成为外贸中真正的中间商。

The number of FTOs therefore rose rapidly to about eight hundred in the country. Incentives for exports were enhanced by allowing firms to retain a larger share of their hard currency earnings and to swap their retained hard currency at designated foreign exchange swap centers at market rates instead of at the overvalued official rate, thus converting their hard currency at more favorable rates. In the second half of the 1980s, China restricted state planning of foreign trade to major commodities (such as crude oil, rice, minerals, poultry, and steel), allowing all other goods (mostly manufactures) to be traded without administrative controls. Even though the government set general export targets, MOFERT stopped making and issuing specific export plans.61 Complementary market-oriented reforms were implemented as well. The (overvalued) Chinese currency was devalued repeatedly. Subsidies for foreign trade were reduced. A system of tax rebates was introduced to encourage processing trade (which involved the import of components without tariffs for assembly and re-export).62 These initial reforms led to an instant and rapid increase in foreign trade (see table 2.2). Total foreign trade rose fivefold, from $20 billion to $102 billion between 1978 and 1988. Exports registered an increase of similar magnitude. As manufactured goods began to account for a growing share of exports, China's foreign trade structure improved significantly. In 1980 manufactured goods accounted for about one-half of total exports; by 1989 manufactured goods constituted 71 percent of total exports.63

因此，全国的自由贸易组织数量迅速增长至约八百家。为了鼓励出口，政府允许企业保留更多外汇收入，并允许企业在指定的外汇兑换中心按市场汇率而非高估的官方汇率兑换外汇，从而以更优惠的汇率兑换外汇。20世纪80年代后半期，中国将对外贸易的国家计划限制在主要商品（如原油、大米、矿产、家禽和钢铁）上，允许所有其他商品（主要是制成品）在不受行政管制的情况下进行贸易。尽管政府设定了总体出口目标，但经济和贸易部停止制定和发布具体的出口计划。此外，政府还实施了一系列配套的市场化改革。人民币（此前被高估）多次贬值，对外贸易补贴也相应减少。为了鼓励加工贸易（即免税进口零部件进行组装后再出口），政府引入了退税制度。这些初期改革使对外贸易迅速增长（见表2.2）。1978年至1988年间，对外贸易总额增长了五倍，从200亿美元增至1020亿美元。出口额也实现了类似的增长。随着制成品在出口中所占份额不断增加，中国的对外贸易结构显著改善。1980年，制成品约占出口总额的一半；到1989年，制成品占出口总额的71%。

As a whole, after one decade of reform, the Chinese economy had become much more open. In 1978 foreign trade accounted for only about 10 percent of the economy based on the exchange rate; by 1988 it had risen to 27 percent.64 Greater openness allowed the economy to grow faster. One study estimates that exports increased China's economic growth by one percentage point per year between 1981 and 1988.65 Research on the benefits of China's opening to the world has also yielded evidence that the growth of foreign trade after 1979 led to the emergence of dynamic regional manufacturing clusters, technological upgrading, and improvements in productivity.66

总体而言，经过十年的改革，中国经济的开放程度显著提高。1978年，按汇率计算，外贸仅占经济总量的约10%；到1988年，这一比例上升至27%。64 开放程度的提高促进了经济增长。一项研究估计，1981年至1988年间，出口使中国经济增长率每年提高一个百分点。65 关于中国对外开放益处的研究也表明，1979年后外贸的增长促进了充满活力的区域制造业集群的出现、技术升级和生产率的提高。66

However, China's reform of its foreign trade regime was far from complete. It maintained a dual-exchange-rate system that distorted prices (unification of exchange rates did not occur until 1994). Most firms still could not engage directly in foreign trade, hampering competition and efficiency. Nominal tariff rates remained high, although the effective tariff rate was lower because many imports—machinery and inputs for export processing—were tax exempt. Licenses and nontariff barriers were widely used to protect domestic industries (mainly SOEs).67

然而，中国的对外贸易体制改革远未完成。它仍然维持着双重汇率制度，扭曲了物价（汇率统一直到1994年才实现）。大多数企业仍然无法直接从事对外贸易，阻碍了竞争和效率的提升。名义关税税率仍然很高，尽管由于许多进口商品——例如机械和出口加工所需的投入品——免税，实际关税税率较低。许可证制度和非关税壁垒被广泛用于保护国内产业（主要是国有企业）。





Rise of the Private Sector





私营部门的崛起


The rapid emergence and expansion of the private sector in the 1980s was not the result of a planned or concerted effort by the party. In fact, the party did not anticipate the rise of the private sector, nor did it actively promote the sector, due to conservative opposition. Instead, reformers took tentative steps to enable the private sector gradually to gain legal status and economic freedom. Unlike in the former Soviet bloc, where the private sector emerged mostly as the result of the privatization of SOEs after the fall of communism, the emergence of the private sector in China was marked by the entry of a huge number of small firms and "creeping privatization" of state-owned assets.68 Throughout the 1980s the dynamism of the private sector, which was practically nonexistent on the eve of reform, created a new engine of economic growth that fundamentally reshaped the Chinese economy and contributed to its long-term success, arguably more than any other policy or reform. As a result, it is reasonable to claim that China's economic success was more one of "growing out of the plan" than of reforming inefficient SOEs.69

20世纪80年代私营经济的迅速崛起和扩张并非党的计划或协调努力的结果。事实上，由于保守派的反对，党既没有预料到私营经济的崛起，也没有积极推动私营经济的发展。相反，改革者采取了试探性的措施，逐步赋予私营经济法律地位和经济自由。与前苏联集团国家私营经济的兴起主要源于共产主义垮台后国有企业的私有化不同，中国私营经济的兴起以大量小型企业的涌入和国有资产的“渐进式私有化”为标志。在整个80年代，私营经济的蓬勃发展——在改革前夕几乎不存在——创造了新的经济增长引擎，从根本上重塑了中国经济，并对其长期成功做出了贡献，其作用或许超过了任何其他政策或改革。因此，可以说中国的经济成功更多地源于“计划的逐步实现”，而非对低效国有企业的改革。

The best summary of this process of growing out of the plan was provided by Zhao Ziyang, the premier in charge of the economy during most of the 1980s. According to Zhao, one of the most important aspects of China's economic reform in the decade was the gradual growth and strengthening of a new market economy that consisted of TVEs, private firms, and foreign-invested firms. The new market economy existed outside the planned economy and operated according to market rules. Due to their efficiency and dynamism, such firms grew much faster than the state-owned firms. Consequently, even as the planned economy remained fundamentally unreformed, the share of the market economy continued to rise, and over time this development changed the nature of the Chinese economy.70

对这一摆脱计划经济体制的过程，最精辟的总结来自赵紫阳，他在20世纪80年代的大部分时间里担任中国经济总理。赵紫阳认为，中国在80年代经济改革中最重要的方面之一，是新兴市场经济的逐步发展壮大。新兴市场经济由乡镇企业、民营企业和外商投资企业组成。这种新兴市场经济独立于计划经济之外，并按照市场规则运行。由于其高效性和活力，这类企业的增长速度远超国有企业。因此，尽管计划经济的根本改革尚未完成，但市场经济的份额却持续上升，随着时间的推移，这一发展改变了中国经济的性质。

In hindsight, the benefits of growing out of the plan are self-evident. The dynamics are simple but powerful. Because private firms are more efficient, they grow faster and can, over time, take market share away from state firms and account for a higher proportion of economic output.71 The growth of the private sector and the commensurate decline of the state sector—the defining characteristic of growing out of the plan—can be seen in the economic statistics of the 1980s (and subsequent decades). In absolute terms, the state sector grew in the 1980s, but because the nonstate sector (mostly private firms) grew much faster, the latter gained a greater share of economic output. Official data show that the industrial output of SOEs rose from 367 billion to 1.234 trillion yuan from 1979 to 1989, while the nonstate sector grew from 100 billion yuan to 967 billion yuan.72 As a result, the share of industrial output attributed to SOEs declined from nearly 78 percent to 56 percent between 1979 and 1989 (table 2.3).

事后看来，摆脱计划经济的益处显而易见。其背后的逻辑简单却意义深远。由于私营企业效率更高，它们增长更快，随着时间的推移，能够从国有企业手中夺取市场份额，并在经济产出中占据更高的比例。私营部门的增长和国有部门的相应萎缩——这是摆脱计划经济的显著特征——可以从20世纪80年代（以及随后几十年）的经济统计数据中看出。从绝对值来看，国有部门在20世纪80年代有所增长，但由于非国有部门（主要是私营企业）的增长速度更快，后者在经济产出中所占的份额更大。官方数据显示，1979年至1989年，国有企业的工业产值从3670亿元人民币增长到1.234万亿元人民币，而非国有企业的工业产值从1000亿元人民币增长到9670亿元人民币。因此，1979年至1989年，国有企业工业产值占工业总产值的比重从近78%下降到56%（表2.3）。

TABLE 2.3. Contribution of the Nonstate Sector to Industrial Output, 1978-1989 (%)

表2.3. 1978-1989年非国有部门对工业产出的贡献率（%）

Source: ZGTJNJ 1990, 416.

来源：ZGTJNJ 1990，416。



Economically, growing out of the plan helped sustain growth and avoid the decline in economic output that had characterized the transition experience in the former Soviet bloc. The superior economic efficiency of the private sector also created competitive pressures on the state sector and accelerated its relative decline in the post-Mao era. Politically, growing out of the plan allowed Chinese reformers in the 1980s to build up political capital quickly while shelving the more difficult task of reforming the SOEs, a step almost certain to precipitate a confrontation with conservatives opposed to dismantling the economic foundation of the party-state. At the same time, it created winners and avoided making powerful groups losers, at least at the crucial initial stage of reform.73

从经济角度来看，摆脱计划经济体制有助于维持增长，避免像前苏联集团转型时期那样出现经济产出下滑。私营部门更高的经济效率也对国有部门构成竞争压力，加速了其在后毛泽东时代相对衰落的进程。从政治角度来看，摆脱计划经济体制使20世纪80年代的中国改革者得以迅速积累政治资本，同时搁置了更为艰巨的国有企业改革任务——这一举措几乎必然会引发与反对拆除党国经济基础的保守派之间的冲突。与此同时，这种模式也造就了赢家，避免了某些强大的利益集团成为输家，至少在改革的关键初期阶段是如此。

However, growing out of the plan had serious limitations. Because the party continued to favor inefficient SOEs and failed to provide secure property rights and a level playing field for the private sector, China's private entrepreneurs operated in an unfavorable regulatory and institutional environment that severely constrained their potential. The economic benefits generated by the rapid growth of the private sector reduced pressures to reform the inefficient SOEs until the end of the 1990s, resulting in ever-increasing subsidies to SOEs that ultimately contributed to an accumulation of bad loans in the state-owned banking system. China's hybrid economy also generated abundant opportunities for rent-seeking because the resources under the control of the state sector, such as the regulatory approvals, land, and bank credits, could be allocated through administrative means to well-connected private entrepreneurs and families of officials.74 As Zhao Ziyang observed after his downfall, the coexistence of two fundamentally different economic systems—a favored state sector and a dynamic private sector—produced significant negative effects on the economy. Although it was wise to adopt growing out of the plan as a transitional strategy, it would stop working in the long term.75

然而，按照既定计划发展存在严重的局限性。由于党继续偏袒效率低下的国有企业，未能为私营部门提供安全的产权保障和公平的竞争环境，中国的私营企业家在不利的监管和制度环境下经营，其潜力受到严重制约。私营部门快速增长带来的经济效益降低了改革效率低下的国有企业的压力，这种情况一直持续到20世纪90年代末，导致对国有企业的补贴不断增加，最终造成国有银行体系不良贷款的累积。中国的混合经济也为寻租提供了大量机会，因为国有部门控制的资源，例如监管审批、土地和银行信贷，可以通过行政手段分配给关系密切的私营企业家和官员家族。正如赵紫阳在下台后所观察到的，两种截然不同的经济体系——一个受优待的国有部门和一个充满活力的私营部门——的并存，对经济产生了显著的负面影响。虽然采用逐步退出原计划的过渡策略是明智的，但从长远来看，这种策略将不再奏效。





Emergence of the Private Sector





私营部门的兴起


The party's primary focus of economic reform in urban areas in the 1980s was on the SOEs. Ironically, the private sector thrived during the decade, even though the party did not provide meaningful economic incentives to promote it. The most the party did was to create the minimal legal or policy space needed for the private sector to emerge and exist, even though this process was slow, gradual, and tentative. The party opened the door slightly for the private sector in July 1981 when the State Council issued a document permitting the establishment of individually operated businesses (geti jingji) in the urban areas. The document, "Several Policy Provisions on Nonagricultural Individually Operated Economic Activities in Urban Areas," allowed private entrepreneurs to hire up to seven employees and operate mainly micro service businesses, such as retail, restaurants, handicrafts, and residential renovation.76 Shortly thereafter, with its major overhaul of the Chinese constitution in 1982, the party officially recognized the legal existence of the geti jingji. Article 11 of the amended constitution states that "economic activities of individual laborers conducted within legally permitted scopes are an auxiliary of the socialist state-owned economy. The state protects the legal rights and interests of individually operated economic activities. The state, through administrative means, guides, assists, and supervises such economic activities."77 (The constitution was amended again in 1988, 1993, 1999, and 2004 to provide greater protections for the private sector.) At the beginning of 1983, the party took another small step by allowing rural residents to engage in nonagricultural activities and, more important, to purchase tractors, motor vehicles, and boats to operate in transportation businesses.78

20世纪80年代，中共在城市地区推行经济改革的重点是国有企业。讽刺的是，尽管中共并未提供有效的经济激励措施来促进私营经济的发展，但私营经济却在这一时期蓬勃发展。中共所做的，仅仅是为私营经济的出现和存在创造了最低限度的法律和政策空间，尽管这一过程缓慢、渐进且充满不确定性。1981年7月，国务院发布文件允许在城市地区设立个体经营企业，这标志着中共为私营经济打开了一扇小门。该文件名为《关于城市非农个体经济活动的若干政策规定》，允许个体经营者雇用最多7名员工，主要从事零售、餐饮、手工艺品制作、房屋装修等微型服务业。此后不久，随着1982年对中国宪法的重大修改，中共正式承认了个体经营企业的合法地位。经修订的宪法第十一条规定：“个体劳动者在法律允许的范围内进行的经济活动是社会主义国有经济的辅助手段。国家保护个体经营经济活动的合法权益。国家通过行政手段指导、协助和监督这种经济活动。”77（宪法分别于1988年、1993年、1999年和2004年再次修订，以加强对私营部门的保护。）1983年初，党又迈出了一小步，允许农村居民从事非农业活动，更重要的是，允许他们购买拖拉机、汽车和船只从事运输业务。78

As the private sector began to grow and prosper, the conservatives pushed back. Chen Yun, Deng's ideological rival who was adamantly opposed to the rise of a private sector, launched a campaign against "economic crimes" in 1982.79 In 1985 he and his followers manufactured a national scandal, the so-called Case of Fake Medicines in Jinjiang. Private entrepreneurs producing food supplements in Jinjiang, Fujian province, were falsely accused of turning out counterfeit medicines on a massive scale. Shortly thereafter, Chen engineered the ouster of the reformist provincial party chief, Xiang Nan, blaming him for the scandal.80

随着私营经济的蓬勃发展，保守派开始反扑。邓小平的意识形态对手陈云坚决反对私营经济的崛起，于1982年发起了一场打击“经济犯罪”的运动。1985年，他及其追随者炮制了一起全国性的丑闻，即所谓的晋江假药案。福建省晋江市生产保健品的私营企业被诬告大规模生产假药。此后不久，陈云策划罢免了改革派省委书记向南，并将丑闻的责任归咎于他。

The most potent tactic deployed by the conservatives was attacking the widespread practice of private firms employing more than seven workers (the legal limit was up to and including seven workers). As they thrived, private entrepreneurs had to expand by employing more workers, thus running up against the legal limit imposed by the State Council's 1981 document on geti jingji. It was Deng's personal intervention in 1984 that apparently prevented the conservatives from cracking down on the private sector.

保守派最有力的策略是打击私营企业普遍存在的雇佣超过七名员工的做法（法定上限为七名员工）。随着私营企业的发展壮大，企业家们不得不通过雇佣更多员工来扩张规模，从而触及了国务院1981年《关于私营企业的规定》所规定的法定上限。邓小平在1984年的亲自干预，显然阻止了保守派对私营企业的打压。

At a meeting with revolutionary veterans on the Central Advisory Committee in 1984, the conservatives clamored for punishment of successful private entrepreneurs (in particular, a flamboyant private entrepreneur who had hired over a hundred workers and had made a fortune by selling snacks). But Deng pushed back hard. "Based on my view," he declared, "we should not deal with the issue of hiring labor [above the limit of seven] for two years. Can [allowing the private entrepreneur to do business] upset our overall situation? But if you touch him [the entrepreneur], the people will say that [our] policy has changed. Confidence would be shaken. Let 'Idiot Seeds' [the brand of snacks sold by the entrepreneur] do its business for a period. What is there to be afraid of?"81

1984年，在与中央顾问委员会革命老兵的一次会议上，保守派人士强烈要求惩罚成功的私营企业家（特别是那位雇佣了一百多名工人、靠卖零食发家致富的张扬企业家）。但邓小平坚决反对。他宣称：“依我之见，两年内不要处理雇佣工人（超过七人上限）的问题。（允许这位私营企业家继续经营）会扰乱我们的大局吗？但如果动他（这位企业家），人民就会说（我们的）政策变了，信心就会动摇。就让‘傻瓜种子’（这位企业家卖的零食品牌）做一段时间吧，有什么好怕的呢？”

It was not until April 1988 that the party formally endorsed private businesses (siying qiye), when the NPC amended the constitution to permit the private sector to exist and develop. Compared with the constitutional amendment passed in 1982, which allowed only individually run private businesses (geti jingji), the constitutional recognition and protection of the private sector in 1988 represented a major ideological breakthrough, even though by that time the private sector had already been thriving in a vast legal gray area for the better part of the decade.82 In June 1988 the State Council issued a landmark document granting private businesses most of the rights they needed to operate and grow. The key provisions of the document, known as "The PRC Interim Regulations on Private Businesses," include permission to hire more than eight workers, limited liability, an expanded scope of business, the right to hire and fire workers and to set their compensation, and the right to enter into joint ventures, to engage in transactions with foreign companies, to conduct foreign trade, and to have access to bank credit.83

直到1988年4月，党才正式认可私营企业，全国人大修改宪法，允许私营企业存在和发展。与1982年仅允许个体经营的私营企业相比，1988年宪法对私营企业的承认和保护是一项重大的思想突破，尽管在此之前，私营企业已经在法律灰色地带蓬勃发展了近十年。1988年6月，国务院发布了一份具有里程碑意义的文件，赋予私营企业经营和发展所需的大部分权利。这份名为《中华人民共和国民营企业暂行规定》的文件的主要条款包括：允许雇用八名以上员工、有限责任、扩大经营范围、有权雇佣和解雇员工并确定其薪酬、有权成立合资企业、与外国公司进行交易、开展对外贸易以及获得银行信贷。

Due to political support from the reformers, the private sector grew at an astonishing rate in the 1980s. At the end of 1978, the private sector, which employed only 150,000 individuals in household-run, or geti, micro businesses, was a negligible economic force. But by 1988 such micro businesses had mushroomed into 14.5 million firms, employing 23 million people.84 TVEs, most of which were private firms despite their official "collective" label, saw their employment grow from 28.3 million to 93.7 million between 1978 and 1989.85 As table 2.4 indicates, growth of the private sector in the 1980s was truly phenomenal.

由于改革者的政治支持，私营部门在20世纪80年代以惊人的速度增长。1978年底，私营部门仅雇佣了15万名家庭经营的微型企业（或称“geti”），其经济影响力微乎其微。但到1988年，这类微型企业已如雨后春笋般涌现，达到1450万家，雇佣了2300万人。尽管官方称之为“集体”企业，但大多数传统企业（TVE）的就业人数在1978年至1989年间从2830万增长到9370万。正如表2.4所示，20世纪80年代私营部门的增长堪称惊人。

Both individually owned businesses and foreign-invested businesses grew rapidly in the 1978-1989 decade (the contribution of firms in these two categories to industrial output grew from zero to more than 8 percent in just one decade). But the star performers in the private sector in the 1980s were undoubtedly the TVEs. Their output rose from 49 billion yuan to 742 billion yuan from 1978 to 1989, accounting for 21 percent of "total social output" in China in 1989.86

1978年至1989年间，个体户和外商投资企业都实现了快速增长（这两类企业对工业产出的贡献率在短短十年内从零增长到超过8%）。但20世纪80年代私营企业中的佼佼者无疑是乡镇企业。它们的产值从1978年的490亿元人民币增长到1989年的7420亿元人民币，占1989年中国“社会总产出”的21%。

TABLE 2.4. Share of Industrial Output, 1978-1989 (%)

表2.4. 1978-1989年工业产值占比（%）

Source: ZGTJNJ 1990, 413, 416.

来源：ZGTJNJ 1990, 413, 416。



Aside from the necessary political protection and regulatory framework that allowed the nascent private sector to exist and expand, several other factors also facilitated the rapid growth of the private sector. Some scholars attribute this phenomenon to the self-interests of the key actors, in particular the entrepreneurs themselves and the local officials. While the growing private businesses enabled entrepreneurs to build and accumulate wealth, the same development also helped local officials expand the sources of revenue, burnish their performance in employment and growth, and acquire private wealth from previously nonexistent opportunities for rent-seeking and self-enrichment.87

除了必要的政治保护和监管框架使得新兴的私营部门得以存在和发展之外，还有其他一些因素促进了私营部门的快速增长。一些学者将这种现象归因于关键参与者的自身利益，特别是企业家和地方官员的利益。私营企业的蓬勃发展使企业家能够积累财富，同时也帮助地方官员拓展了收入来源，提升了他们在就业和经济增长方面的业绩，并从以前不存在的寻租和中饱私囊的机会中攫取了私人财富。

However, other economic and political factors likely played a far more important and direct role in turbo-charging growth of the private sector. The most critical factor is the success of the decollectivization of agriculture. The virtuous cycle created by the rural reforms produced the essential conditions for the private sector to take root and thrive. On the supply side, higher productivity in the rural areas increased overall income, which boosted private savings for investment and in turn then allowed a small number of entrepreneurs to raise capital, either by borrowing from family, relatives, and friends or by tapping into their savings. Greater efficiency in rural production also freed up the surplus or the underutilized vast labor pool in the countryside, channeling them into the more productive manufacturing and service sectors.

然而，其他经济和政治因素可能在推动私营部门快速增长方面发挥了更为重要和直接的作用。其中最关键的因素是农业非集体化的成功。农村改革形成的良性循环为私营部门的生根发芽和蓬勃发展创造了必要条件。在供给侧，农村地区生产力的提高增加了总收入，从而促进了私人储蓄用于投资，进而使少数企业家能够筹集资金，他们可以通过向家人、亲戚和朋友借钱或动用自身储蓄来实现这一目标。农村生产效率的提高也释放了农村地区过剩或未充分利用的大量劳动力，并将他们引导至生产率更高的制造业和服务业。

On the demand side, higher rural productivity raised farmers' income and boosted their demand for consumer goods. At the same time, the economic distortions of the Maoist era had led to serious shortages of consumer goods and services, thus creating a huge backlog of demand that the private sector could meet. The demand for employment in the modern sector, which (the already bloated) SOEs could not meet, also forced the party to liberalize the economy so that the new private firms could absorb new entrants into the labor market (between 1980 and 1985 alone, more than thirty-seven million people in the urban areas needed employment).88

在需求方面，农村生产率的提高增加了农民的收入，并刺激了他们对消费品的需求。与此同时，毛泽东时代的经济扭曲导致消费品和服务严重短缺，从而造成了巨大的需求积压，而私营部门能够满足这些需求。现代部门的就业需求（国有企业已经臃肿不堪）也迫使党进行经济自由化改革，以便新的私营企业能够吸纳新进入劳动力市场的人员（仅在1980年至1985年间，城镇地区就有超过3700万人需要就业）。

Yet, despite such favorable conditions, private entrepreneurs nevertheless hedged their bets by disguising the ownership of their businesses. A popular method was to register as "collective enterprises" rather than as "private," or siying, firms (legally, the state did not formally endorse siying firms until 1988). In addition to the political protection, private businesses registered as "collective enterprises," in a practice known as "wearing red hats," so they could navigate the many regulatory obstacles to obtain business licenses and secure access to banking services and credit as well as to government contracts. To be sure, donning a "red hat" had its disadvantages as well because such private firms were effectively paying for political protection, and they had to bear extra financial burdens (such as forced contributions to local budgets and employment). Private entrepreneurs resorting to this survival strategy also exposed themselves to legal risks, such as disputes over the ownership of their assets and even criminal prosecution.89

然而，尽管条件如此有利，私营企业家仍然通过隐瞒企业所有权来规避风险。一种常见的做法是注册为“集体企业”，而不是“私人”或“公司”（在法律上，国家直到1988年才正式认可“公司”）。除了政治保护之外，私营企业注册为“集体企业”（这种做法被称为“戴红帽子”），是为了绕过获得营业执照、银行服务和信贷以及政府合同的诸多监管障碍。当然，“戴红帽子”也有其弊端，因为这些私营企业实际上是在为政治保护付费，并且不得不承担额外的经济负担（例如强制向地方预算缴纳费用和就业）。采取这种生存策略的私营企业家也面临着法律风险，例如资产所有权纠纷，甚至刑事诉讼。

Although wearing a "red hat" was widespread, the exact share of private firms among the TVEs is a matter of dispute.90 According to a 1995 survey conducted by the State Administration for Industry and Commerce (SAIC), of 178,000 "collective firms," roughly one in five of them had private majority ownership.91 This number almost certainly underestimates the share of private firms among collective firms. Yasheng Huang's research uncovers more convincing evidence that, based on data collected by the Ministry of Agriculture, nearly 90 percent of TVEs in 1985 were actually private firms.92

尽管“红帽”现象普遍存在，但中小微企业中私营企业的确切比例仍存在争议。90 根据国家工商行政管理总局1995年的一项调查，在17.8万家“集体企业”中，约有五分之一为私营控股企业。91 这个数字几乎肯定低估了私营企业在集体企业中所占的比例。黄亚生的研究揭示了更有力的证据，根据农业部收集的数据，1985年近90%的中小微企业实际上是私营企业。92

Entrepreneurs blazing the trail in the 1980s came from a wide range of social backgrounds, but a majority hailed from the countryside, again affirming the critical contribution of the rural reform to the transformation of the Chinese economy. According to a national survey of 1,187 owners of private firms in the countryside in 1991, 42 percent had served as village cadres, 19 percent had been principal officials of TVEs, 13 percent had been workers in TVEs, and 9 percent were former PLA soldiers. Another survey of 1,853 owners of private businesses (apparently based in urban areas), also conducted in 1991, shows that 30 percent had resigned from SOEs, 31 percent had been peasants, 16 percent had been self-employed, and 12 percent had been unemployed.93 In other words, most pioneers in the private sector came from outside the state sector.

20世纪80年代开创先河的企业家来自各行各业，但其中绝大多数来自农村，这再次印证了农村改革对中国经济转型的重要贡献。1991年一项针对1187名农村私营企业主的全国性调查显示，42%的人曾担任村干部，19%的人曾担任乡镇企业主要干部，13%的人曾是乡镇企业员工，9%的人曾是解放军退役军人。同年，另一项针对1853名私营企业主（显然位于城市地区）的调查显示，30%的人曾是国有企业员工，31%的人曾是农民，16%的人是个体户，12%的人处于失业状态。换句话说，私营领域的大多数开拓者都来自国有部门之外。





Reform of the SOEs





国有企业改革


On the eve of Deng's reform, SOEs dominated the modern sectors of the Chinese economy, accounting for 87 percent of the fiscal revenue of the state, 77.6 percent of industrial output, and 78 percent of urban employment.94

在邓小平改革前夕，国有企业主导着中国经济的现代部门，占国家财政收入的87%、工业产值的77.6%和城镇就业的78%。

However, like their counterparts in the former Soviet bloc, Chinese SOEs were plagued by systemic inefficiencies.95 As economic organizations, these firms were more like government bureaucracies than profit-seeking economic actors because they were administered by the government through directives governing nearly all operational matters. As part of a planned economy, they did not have the basic freedoms for business operations, such as determining what or how much to produce. Nor did the SOEs have control in matters such as the amount of labor to employ, the appointment of management, and compensation of workers and management, because it was the supervising government bureaucracies that made these decisions. Like the SOEs in the Communist regimes of the former Soviet bloc, Chinese SOEs had two critical institutional flaws: an absence of real owners and soft budget constraints. Nominally, the "state" owned these firms. In reality, there were no real owners but instead multiple bureaucracies (such as government agencies in charge of production planning, fiscal revenue, and labor-related issues) exercising control over them. This situation not only created conflicts of interest among stakeholders but also made it impossible for the SOEs to pursue economically efficient goals. The "soft budget constraints" meant that these firms were not responsible for their failure because they could always count on the state to bail them out.96

然而，与前苏联集团的国有企业一样，中国国有企业也饱受系统性效率低下的困扰。作为经济组织，这些企业更像是政府官僚机构，而非以盈利为目的的经济主体，因为它们几乎所有运营事项都受到政府指令的约束。作为计划经济的一部分，它们缺乏基本的商业运营自由，例如决定生产什么或生产多少。国有企业也无法控制诸如雇佣多少劳动力、任命管理人员以及员工和管理人员的薪酬等事项，因为这些决策都由监管的政府官僚机构做出。与前苏联集团共产主义政权的国有企业一样，中国国有企业存在两个关键的制度缺陷：缺乏真正的所有者和预算约束的松散性。名义上，“国家”拥有这些企业。但实际上，并没有真正的所有者，而是由多个官僚机构（例如负责生产计划、财政收入和劳工相关问题的政府机构）对它们行使控制权。这种情况不仅造成了利益相关者之间的利益冲突，也使得国有企业无法追求经济效益目标。“软性预算约束”意味着这些企业无需为自身的失败负责，因为它们总能指望国家出手相救。

The last systemic flaw of Chinese SOEs was their so-called policy burden. As an essential component of the party-state, SOEs had to perform many noneconomic roles that served the needs of the party, such as maintaining employment regardless of costs and providing social services, including healthcare, housing, childcare, and retirement income.97

中国国有企业的最后一个系统性缺陷是所谓的政策负担。作为党国体制的重要组成部分，国有企业必须承担许多服务于党的需要的非经济职能，例如不惜一切代价维持就业，以及提供包括医疗、住房、托幼和退休收入在内的社会服务。

Given the centrality of the SOEs in the Chinese economy and the daunting technical difficulties of restructuring these firms (practically all attempts to reform SOEs in the former Soviet bloc and Yugoslavia had ended in failure), reformers were forced to adopt a far more cautious and incremental approach.98 Their first step was to expand the autonomy of the SOEs and to grant more financial incentives to SOE management in the belief that greater operational freedoms and material rewards could improve their efficiency. After localized experiments in Sichuan and Beijing in early 1979 produced promising results, the State Council formally endorsed measures to expand the autonomy of SOEs in July 1979.99 According to "Several Provisions on Expanding Management Autonomy of State-owned Industrial Enterprises," the management of the SOEs could retain a portion of the profits, hire workers, appoint executives, and exercise a wide range of executive authority provided they fulfilled the targets set by the state.100

鉴于国有企业在中国经济中的核心地位，以及重组这些企业所面临的巨大技术难题（事实上，前苏联集团和南斯拉夫几乎所有国有企业改革尝试都以失败告终），改革者被迫采取更为谨慎和渐进的方式。他们的第一步是扩大国有企业的自主权，并向国有企业管理层提供更多财政激励，因为他们相信更大的运营自由和物质奖励可以提高其效率。 1979年初，四川和北京的试点项目取得了令人鼓舞的成果后，国务院于1979年7月正式批准了扩大国有企业自主权的措施。根据《关于扩大国有工业企业管理自主权的若干规定》，国有企业的管理层可以在完成国家设定的目标的前提下，保留一部分利润，雇用员工，任命管理人员，并行使广泛的管理权力。

However, the expanded autonomy quickly created its own problems, especially as the managers of the SOEs gamed the new policy to retain more profits, which led to less income for the state and an increase in budget deficits.101 To liberal economists, expansion of SOE management autonomy alone was unlikely to produce sustained improvements in SOE performance. Real SOE autonomy was impossible to achieve because the state kept most of the power that directly affected the performance and operations of the enterprises. Expanding SOE autonomy also worsened the "principal-agent" problem in the state-socialist system because it allowed managers to behave more opportunistically.102 Most important, because SOEs were part of the market, giving the enterprises autonomy when the market itself had systemic flaws was unlikely to work. Specifically, when prices were distorted, even enterprises with full autonomy could not respond to distorted markets or be responsible for profits and losses.103

然而，扩大的自主权很快就带来了自身的问题，尤其是国有企业管理者利用新政策谋取更多利润，导致国家收入减少，预算赤字增加。101 在自由主义经济学家看来，仅仅扩大国有企业管理自主权不太可能持续改善国有企业的绩效。真正的国有企业自主权无法实现，因为国家仍然掌握着直接影响企业绩效和运营的大部分权力。扩大国有企业自主权还会加剧国家社会主义体制中的“委托代理”问题，因为它允许管理者更加投机取巧。102 最重要的是，由于国有企业是市场的一部分，当市场本身存在系统性缺陷时，赋予企业自主权不太可能奏效。具体而言，当价格扭曲时，即使拥有完全自主权的企业也无法应对扭曲的市场，也无法对盈亏负责。103

Once it became clear that expanding the autonomy of the SOEs was an unpromising proposition, Chinese leaders began to look for alternatives. Liberal economists argued that a successful reform of SOEs would be possible only when it was part of a package of reforms of other institutions, such as prices, taxation, wages, social security, and the financial system, that directly affected the SOEs. But the party did not adopt their proposal for comprehensive reform.104

一旦扩大国有企业自主权的方案行不通，中国领导人便开始寻找替代方案。自由派经济学家认为，只有将国有企业改革与其他直接影响国有企业的制度改革（例如价格、税收、工资、社会保障和金融体系）相结合，才能成功。但党并未采纳他们的全面改革方案。

The alternative, which the party eventually settled on in 1986, was the "contract responsibility system" (chengbao zerenzhi). In essence, the contract responsibility system was an updated version of a 1981 government attempt to attach conditions to the autonomy of the SOEs.105 What made the reform proposed in 1986 different was its granting of full operational autonomy in return for commitments to fulfill fixed financial targets. A document issued by the State Council in February 1988 formalized this system (implementation had begun in 1987).106

最终，党在1986年确定了“合同责任制”。本质上，合同责任制是1981年政府试图为国有企业自主权附加条件的举措的升级版。1986年提出的改革方案的不同之处在于，它赋予国有企业完全的运营自主权，但要求其承诺完成既定的财务目标。国务院于1988年2月发布的文件正式确立了这一制度（该制度已于1987年开始实施）。

In terms of specifics, the "contract responsibility" of the SOEs consisted of meeting financial targets, such as profitability, growth, reduction of losses, capital investments, technological innovations, and tax payments. SOEs that reached these goals could retain more profits to provide higher compensation to workers.107 However, the contract responsibility system quickly proved to be a disappointment. Because of the heterogeneity of firms and their vastly different structural conditions (such as competition, supply, and demand) among industrial sectors, it was nearly impossible for the government to stipulate standard contracting terms or to set performance standards.108

具体而言，国有企业的“合同责任”包括实现盈利、增长、减少亏损、资本投资、技术创新和纳税等财务目标。达到这些目标的国有企业可以保留更多利润，从而为员工提供更高的薪酬。然而，合同责任制度很快就被证明是令人失望的。由于各行业的企业异质性以及它们之间巨大的结构性条件（例如竞争、供求关系）差异，政府几乎不可能制定标准合同条款或设定绩效标准。

Even worse, the contract responsibility system rewarded short-term SOE behavior because the length of a typical contract was three years, which encouraged SOE managers to cut spending on capital investments and technological upgrading in order to reach their profit targets. SOEs also had powerful incentives to raise prices to increase their profit margins—an easy thing to do in sectors where incumbent SOEs faced little competition. Despite the formal contracts signed between SOE management and supervising government agencies, SOEs continued to enjoy soft budget constraints and, as a result, were not responsible for failing to fulfill the terms of their contracts. As the contract responsibility system did not touch the core issue of "state ownership," it was obviously incapable of addressing all the pathologies of such ownership.109

更糟糕的是，由于合同期限通常为三年，合同责任制反而奖励了国有企业的短期行为，这促使国有企业管理者为了达到利润目标而削减资本投资和技术升级方面的支出。国有企业也有强烈的动机提高价格以提高利润率——在现有国有企业竞争较小的行业，这很容易做到。尽管国有企业管理层与监管政府机构之间签署了正式合同，但国有企业仍然享有宽松的预算约束，因此无需为未能履行合同条款承担责任。由于合同责任制没有触及“国有所有制”的核心问题，显然无法解决这种所有制下的所有弊病。

Despite the flaws in China's approaches to reforming the SOEs in the 1980s, some economists endorsed these limited measures but with qualifications, arguing that they helped improve the SOEs' financial performance, output, and innovative capacity.110 But evidence supports the consensus opinion among Chinese policymakers and economists that the SOE reforms in the 1980s essentially were failures.111 The early experiment to expand SOE autonomy was short-lived; it was replaced by the contract responsibility system, which itself was abandoned in the early 1990s when the post-Tiananmen leadership introduced a new round of reforms that sought to "establish a modern corporate system." By then, most SOEs were mired in crisis because they simply could not compete with private firms or imports. By the end of the 1990s, the government, no longer able to keep loss-making SOEs afloat without endangering the banking system, was forced to adopt a new strategy of "grasp the big and let go of the small," by which it retained only the large SOEs in critical sectors (banking, telecommunications, transportation, and energy) and allowed small and medium-sized SOEs to go bankrupt en masse.112 Zhao Ziyang, the reformist premier in charge of the economy in the 1980s, was perhaps the most authoritative person to render a verdict on this issue. Reflecting on China's reform when he was under house arrest in the 1990s, Zhao said: "Reform of the mechanisms of SOEs did not touch the fundamentals." By "fundamentals," he likely meant the most critical institutional factors affecting the performance of the SOEs, such as state ownership, the pricing system, capital markets, and the social safety net. However, Zhao believed that, ironically, the failure to reform the SOEs had a positive impact during China's transition to a market economy.113 Although he did not elaborate on this point, he was likely thinking of the potential political risks and costs of more aggressive reforms that might have made SOEs far more efficient but would have also triggered strong opposition from both the ideological conservatives and the affected interest groups.

尽管中国在20世纪80年代对国有企业进行改革的方式存在缺陷，但一些经济学家对这些有限的措施表示赞同，并附加了一些条件，认为这些措施有助于改善国有企业的财务绩效、产出和创新能力。然而，有证据支持中国政策制定者和经济学家普遍认同的观点，即20世纪80年代的国有企业改革本质上是失败的。早期扩大国有企业自主权的尝试昙花一现，很快就被承包责任制所取代。而承包责任制本身也在20世纪90年代初被废除，当时后天安门时代的领导层推出了一轮旨在“建立现代公司制度”的新改革。到那时，大多数国有企业都深陷危机，因为它们根本无法与私营企业或进口产品竞争。到了20世纪90年代末，政府已无力在不危及银行体系的情况下维持亏损国有企业的运营，被迫采取“抓大放小”的新策略，即只保留关键领域（银行、电信、交通和能源）的大型国有企业，而允许中小国有企业大规模破产。20世纪80年代负责经济的改革派总理赵紫阳或许是对此问题做出最权威评判的人。20世纪90年代，赵紫阳在被软禁期间反思中国的改革时说：“国有企业机制改革没有触及根本。”他所说的“根本”很可能是指影响国有企业绩效的最关键的制度因素，例如国有所有权、定价体系、资本市场和社会保障体系。然而，赵认为，具有讽刺意味的是，国有企业改革的失败反而对中国向市场经济转型产生了积极影响。尽管他没有详细阐述这一点，但他可能考虑到更激进的改革可能带来的潜在政治风险和成本，这些改革虽然可能使国有企业效率更高，但也会引发意识形态保守派和相关利益集团的强烈反对。





Dual-Track Price Reform





双轨制价格改革


As in Soviet-type economies, prices in China during the prereform era were set by the state, not by the market (although as a more decentralized economy, some prices in China were set by local, not central, authorities).114 Theoretically, price reform should be a top priority during a country's transition from state-socialism to a market economy. But as the experience of the former Soviet bloc in the early 1990s shows, price reform could only be completed with a "big bang" that freed all prices at once—at the cost of hyperinflation that would be economically disruptive and politically destructive for the reformers.115

与苏联式经济体类似，中国改革前的物价由国家而非市场决定（尽管中国经济较为分散，部分物价由地方而非中央政府决定）。理论上，物价改革应是国家从国家社会主义向市场经济转型过程中的首要任务。但正如前苏联集团在20世纪90年代初的经验所示，物价改革只能通过“大爆炸”式的改革才能完成，即一次性释放所有价格——但这将导致恶性通货膨胀，对经济造成破坏，对改革者而言则具有政治毁灭性。

By comparison, China adopted a far more gradual and cautious approach to price reform in the 1980s, for two reasons. Economically, unlike the Soviet bloc after the fall of communism, China did not face high inflation in the early 1980s and therefore had no need for the stabilization program that all Soviet bloc countries had to adopt. Politically, Chinese reformers in the early 1980s had to share power with conservatives, so they did not have the ability to push through radical reforms, such as the freeing up of prices. Even more important, Chinese reformers likely realized that a failed price reform could spell calamity for the entire reform program (such fears were realized when mere talk of price reform triggered panic buying and high inflation in the summer of 1988).

相比之下，中国在20世纪80年代采取了更为渐进和谨慎的价格改革方式，原因有二。首先，经济方面，与苏联解体后的苏联集团不同，中国在20世纪80年代初并未面临高通胀，因此无需像所有苏联集团国家那样实施稳定经济的方案。其次，政治方面，20世纪80年代初的中国改革者必须与保守派分享权力，因此他们无力推行激进的改革，例如价格自由化。更重要的是，中国改革者可能意识到，价格改革的失败可能会给整个改革计划带来灾难性的后果（这种担忧在1988年夏天得到了印证，当时仅仅是谈论价格改革就引发了恐慌性抢购和高通胀）。

As a result, China did not start to reform the pricing system until 1984, when the government implemented an experimental program of "dual-track pricing." Instead of ending mandatory pricing set by the state, dual-track pricing retained mandatory pricing but also introduced a second set of parallel prices determined by the market. The initial concept was proposed by a graduate student at an academic conference in 1984. Economists advocating dual-track pricing argued that since the prices of most products cannot be liberalized without eviscerating the command economy, the only way to reform a planned economy without abandoning it right away is to introduce pricing that allows both plan-mandated and liberalized prices to operate alongside each other to bring supply and demand into balance.116

因此，直到1984年，中国才开始改革价格体系，政府实施了“双轨制”试点项目。双轨制并没有废除国家强制定价，而是保留了强制定价，同时引入了由市场决定的平行价格体系。这一概念最初是由一位研究生在1984年的一次学术会议上提出的。支持双轨制的经济学家认为，由于大多数产品的价格自由化必然会瓦解计划经济体制，因此，在不立即放弃计划经济体制的前提下，改革计划经济的唯一途径是引入一种允许计划价格和自由化价格并行运作的价格体系，以平衡供求关系。

The government quickly embraced this alluring concept. In May 1984 the State Council formally permitted SOEs to adopt dual-track pricing. Specifically, SOEs could sell excess output at prices they set by themselves (but only 20 percent above or below the state-mandated prices).117

政府迅速接受了这一极具吸引力的理念。1984年5月，国务院正式允许国有企业实行双轨定价。具体而言，国有企业可以自行定价出售过剩产品（但价格不得高于或低于国家规定的价格20%）。

Leading economists have since hailed dual-track pricing reform as an innovative measure that produced winners but no losers.118

此后，多位知名经济学家称赞双轨定价改革是一项创新举措，它造就了赢家，却没有输家。

It likely also gave the SOEs a greater incentive to increase production because they could charge higher prices for products exceeding the planned target. Such marked-up products also provided a vital source of inputs for the nonstate sector, in particular the TVEs that otherwise could not purchase products made by SOEs outside the plan.119

这也可能促使国有企业更有动力提高产量，因为它们可以对超出计划目标的产品收取更高的价格。这些加价产品也为非国有部门，特别是那些原本无法购买计划外国有企业产品的乡镇企业，提供了重要的投入来源。

But the dual-track pricing system also facilitated rent-seeking behavior and corruption because the SOEs and well-connected individuals could easily make a quick profit by obtaining products at lower state-mandated prices within the plan and then selling them at higher prices. Many SOEs also gamed the new system by trying to get more "fixed-price" (below-market price) inputs from the plan and to underreport their production so they could sell more at above-plan prices.120

但双轨定价体系也助长了寻租行为和腐败，因为国有企业和关系密切的个人可以轻易地通过在计划内以较低的国家规定价格获取产品，然后再以更高的价格出售，从而快速牟利。许多国有企业还试图钻新体系的空子，从计划中获取更多“固定价格”（低于市场价格）的投入品，并少报产量，以便能够以高于计划价格出售更多产品。

For all the attention the dual-track pricing in the 1980s received, it is impossible to evaluate its contribution to China's price reform. Although the share of products subject to state-mandated prices continued to fall, it was most likely the result of increased production that can be credited to other factors, especially the rapid increase in industrial output by nonstate firms.121 Instructively, when nearly all prices were fully liberalized in the 1990s, this achievement was not due to any price reform. By that time, China was no longer a shortage economy. The liberalization of prices was almost certainly the result of sufficient supply made possible by the explosive growth of the private sector and foreign trade.

尽管20世纪80年代的双轨定价政策备受关注，但我们无法评估其对中国价格改革的贡献。虽然受国家强制定价的产品比例持续下降，但这很可能是产量增加的结果，而产量增加又可归功于其他因素，特别是国有企业工业产出的快速增长。值得注意的是，20世纪90年代几乎所有价格都实现了完全自由化，但这并非价格改革的结果。到那时，中国已不再是短缺型经济体。价格自由化几乎可以肯定是由于私营部门和对外贸易的爆炸式增长带来了充足的供应。





Summary





概括


Measured by key indicators of economic performance, China achieved unqualified success in the 1980s. Through domestic reform and integration with the global economy, the country scored its best growth rates since 1949. Per capita income, which was 315 yuan in 1978, rose to 1,189 yuan in 1989. Adjusted for inflation, real per capita income nearly tripled during the period. The gross social product (a proximate measure of the gross national product) rose from 677.6 billion yuan in 1978 to 3.46 trillion yuan in 1989, representing a 3,600 percent increase after adjusting for inflation. Despite high inflation in 1988-1989, China maintained overall macroeconomic stability, with inflation averaging 6.8 percent per year between 1979 and 1989. The economic structure improved as well. Household consumption averaged 65 percent of national income during the period, reflecting a relatively balanced economy. The rapid growth of the nonstate sector reduced the role of the state in the economy, as indicated by the fall of its share in industrial output from 78 percent in 1978 to 56 percent in 1989.122

从关键经济指标来看，中国在20世纪80年代取得了巨大的成功。通过国内改革和融入全球经济，中国实现了自1949年以来最高的经济增长率。人均收入从1978年的315元人民币增长到1989年的1189元人民币。经通货膨胀调整后，实际人均收入在这一时期几乎增长了两倍。社会生产总值（国民生产总值的近似指标）从1978年的6776亿元人民币增长到1989年的3.46万亿元人民币，经通货膨胀调整后增长了3600%。尽管1988-1989年通货膨胀率较高，但中国总体上保持了宏观经济稳定，1979年至1989年间的年均通货膨胀率为6.8%。经济结构也得到了改善。在此期间，家庭消费占国民收入的比例平均为65%，反映出经济相对平衡。非国有部门的快速增长削弱了国家在经济中的作用，这体现在其工业产出份额从1978年的78%下降到1989年的56%。

China's integration with the world economy proceeded at a rapid pace as well. Foreign trade rose from $20.6 billion in 1978 to $111.6 billion in 1989, averaging an annual growth rate of 49 percent. Exports increased from $9.75 billion to $52.5 billion during the same period. The inflow of FDI totaled $15.4 billion during the decade.123 Even though China would attract far more FDI in the 1990s, this amount still represents foreign investors' vote of confidence in Deng's economic revolution.

中国融入世界经济的进程也同样迅猛。对外贸易额从1978年的206亿美元增长到1989年的1116亿美元，年均增长率达49%。同期，出口额从97.5亿美元增长到525亿美元。十年间，外国直接投资流入总额达154亿美元。尽管中国在20世纪90年代吸引的外国直接投资远超这一数字，但154亿美元的流入量仍然体现了外国投资者对邓小平经济革命的信心。

Aside from these measurable achievements, reform in the 1980s also scored major political and institutional breakthroughs. Obviously, by delivering a proverbial "early harvest" of the fruits of reform, Deng and his supporters reaped immense political capital to bolster their case for more reform. Thus the most important success of the reform in the 1980s was the laying of the foundations for China's economic take-off in the subsequent two decades.

除了这些可衡量的成就之外，20世纪80年代的改革也取得了重大的政治和制度突破。显然，通过提前收获改革的成果，邓小平及其支持者积累了巨大的政治资本，从而更有力地推动了进一步的改革。因此，20世纪80年代改革最重要的成就，是为中国此后二十年的经济腾飞奠定了基础。

As this chapter shows, Deng's reform and opening in the decade substantially weakened the command economy by growing out of the plan. Rural decollectivization not only dismantled a key pillar of the Maoist economic system but also unleashed pent-up entrepreneurial energy and created a virtuous cycle that powered the emergence and growth of a new and dynamic private sector. At the same time, integrating China into the global economy through trade and investment enabled a previously self-isolated economy to capitalize on its comparative advantage of cheap labor. The combination of an efficient domestic private sector and integration with the global economy quickly became the engine of Chinese growth.

正如本章所示，邓小平在十年间推行的改革开放，通过摆脱计划经济的束缚，极大地削弱了计划经济体制。农村非集体化不仅瓦解了毛泽东时代经济体系的关键支柱，也释放了被压抑的创业能量，形成良性循环，推动了新兴且充满活力的私营部门的出现和发展。与此同时，通过贸易和投资将中国融入全球经济，使这个此前相对封闭的经济体能够充分发挥其廉价劳动力的比较优势。高效的国内私营部门与全球经济的融合，迅速成为中国经济增长的引擎。

To be sure, growing out of the plan avoided tackling the thorny issue of SOE reform. Indeed, China's attempts to reform these dinosaurs of totalitarianism in the 1980s were largely unsuccessful. It would take another decade and a pending banking crisis for the party to muster the courage to push through major SOE reforms. But this particular failure must be understood in the political context of the times. With powerful conservative forces led by Chen Yun entrenched at the top of the party's leadership, it was inconceivable that Deng and his fellow reformers would risk a confrontation in order to enact far more radical SOE reforms (such as mass bankruptcy and privatization—the approach the party eventually adopted at the end of the 1990s). Given the complete lack of knowledge in the 1980s about how to reform the SOEs and the far superior alternative of cultivating new and more efficient economic forces, such as domestic private firms and foreign-invested firms, it made perfect political and economic sense to prioritize growing out of the plan over reforming the plan itself.

诚然，从该计划中发展而来，回避了棘手的国有企业改革问题。事实上，中国在20世纪80年代对这些极权主义“恐龙”进行改革的尝试大多以失败告终。又过了十年，加上迫在眉睫的银行业危机，党才鼓起勇气推进国有企业重大改革。但必须将这一失败置于当时的政治背景下理解。在陈云领导的强大保守势力牢牢把持党内领导层的情况下，邓小平及其改革派同僚几乎不可能冒着对抗的风险去推行更为激进的国有企业改革（例如大规模破产和私有化——这是党在20世纪90年代末最终采取的措施）。鉴于 20 世纪 80 年代人们对如何改革国有企业完全缺乏了解，而且培育国内私营企业和外商投资企业等新的、更高效的经济力量是一种远优于改革国有企业的替代方案，因此，优先发展摆脱计划的经济力量而不是改革计划本身，在政治和经济上都是完全合理的。

Nevertheless, the success of growing out of the plan during the decade was achieved at the expense of not dismantling, once and for all, the economic foundations of totalitarianism—the SOEs through which the party-state controlled the "commanding heights" of the economy. Even though the output of the private sector eventually exceeded that of these firms, they continued to dominate some of the most important sectors of the economy, in particular finance, energy, telecommunications, and transportation. The party-state's control of these firms not only allowed the regime access to bountiful economic resources but also necessitated costly protection of these firms that distorted markets and undercut economic efficiency. Zhao Ziyang, the reformer in charge of economic policy in the 1980s, foresaw the long-term danger of a "dual-track" transition characterized by rapid growth of the private sector and continuing state dominance in a large segment of the economy. "The long-term coexistence of two systems and two tracks," he warned in the 1990s, "ultimately will produce enormous negative effects. It was right to resort to gradual transition initially, but this approach must not continue in the long run."124 If anything, the deposed former premier and CCP general secretary likely underestimated the economic and political costs of the dual-track transition. The dual-track transition would ultimately lose momentum, and the party-state would be forced to use its power to support a hugely inefficient state sector at the expense of the private sector.125

然而，尽管在十年间成功摆脱了该计划的束缚，但代价是未能彻底瓦解极权主义的经济基础——即党国通过控制经济“制高点”的国有企业。即使私营部门的产出最终超过了这些企业，它们仍然主导着一些最重要的经济部门，特别是金融、能源、电信和交通运输。党国对这些企业的控制不仅使政权能够获取丰富的经济资源，而且还需要对这些企业进行代价高昂的保护，从而扭曲市场并削弱经济效率。20世纪80年代负责经济政策的改革者赵紫阳预见到了“双轨”转型带来的长期危险，这种转型的特点是私营部门快速增长，而国家在经济的大部分领域仍然占据主导地位。他在上世纪90年代就警告说：“两套制度、两条轨道长期并存，最终会产生巨大的负面影响。最初采取渐进式过渡是正确的，但这种做法绝不能长期持续下去。”124 事实上，这位被罢黜的前总理兼中共中央总书记很可能低估了双轨制过渡的经济和政治代价。双轨制过渡最终会失去动力，党国将被迫动用权力扶持效率低下的国有部门，而牺牲私营部门的利益。125







3 Building Neo-Authoritarianism, 1992-2002

3 构建新威权主义，1992-2002




THE BLOODY end of the Tiananmen crisis closed off, at least for the foreseeable future, China's path to a more open and free society. But the neoauthoritarian order—capitalist economic development under one-party rule—did not emerge in the immediate aftermath of the crackdown. Indeed, the party still had two plausible pathways to choose. One was to reverse the economic reforms of the 1980s, reassert the party's control over the economy and society, and reconstitute a system embodying most of the institutional characteristics of the early 1950s. The other was to fully embrace neoauthoritarian developmentalism. Initially, between mid-1989 to the end of 1991, hard-liners who had gained power after the crackdown attempted to resuscitate the old communist system. Even though their efforts largely failed, a prolonged political stasis during which the regime would be stuck in a transitional no-man's land was a distinct possibility.

天安门事件的血腥结局至少在可预见的未来，堵死了中国通往更加开放自由社会的道路。但新威权秩序——一党专政下的资本主义经济发展——并非在镇压结束后立即出现。事实上，中共当时仍有两条可行的道路可供选择。一条是逆转20世纪80年代的经济改革，重新确立党对经济和社会的控制，并重建一个体现20世纪50年代初期大部分制度特征的体系。另一条则是全面拥抱新威权发展主义。最初，从1989年中期到1991年底，镇压后掌权的强硬派试图复兴旧的共产主义制度。尽管他们的努力大多以失败告终，但政权陷入长期的政治停滞，处于过渡时期的不上不下状态，这并非不可能。

The event galvanizing the party into unreservedly endorsing neo-authoritarian developmentalism was the fall of the Soviet Union in December 1991. Less than a month later, Deng Xiaoping started his tour of southern China that, in substance though not in name, launched the post-Tiananmen era of neo-authoritarian rule. Due to the purge of the liberal wing from the party in 1989 and the demoralization of the hard-liners by the dissolution of the Soviet Union, party leadership became ideologically more homogenous. However reluctantly, hard-liners bought into Deng's vision of capitalist economic modernization under one-party rule because this was the only feasible survival strategy despite their past resistance to this path.

促使党毫无保留地拥护新威权发展主义的事件是1991年12月苏联的解体。不到一个月后，邓小平开始了对中国南方的访问，这次访问虽然名义上并非如此，但实际上开启了后天安门时代的新威权统治。由于1989年党内自由派的清洗以及苏联解体对强硬派士气的打击，党的领导层在意识形态上变得更加同质化。尽管强硬派过去一直抵制这条道路，但最终还是接受了邓小平在一党专政下推行资本主义经济现代化的愿景，因为这是唯一可行的生存策略。

After he rallied the party to his neo-authoritarian vision and installed a new leadership team in the fall of 1992, Deng gradually faded away from the political scene. Jiang Zemin, the compromise choice for the CCP general secretary the elders picked during the Tiananmen crisis, became an effective implementer of Dengist neo-authoritarian strategy. Under Jiang's leadership, the party was laser-focused on economic development while adopting novel tactics to keep its grip on a fast-changing society. The individual components of the party's survival strategy, such as performance-based legitimacy, an implicit security pact among elites, nationalism, social co-optation, and selective repression, evolved into the key pillars of the post-1989 neo-authoritarian order.

1992年秋季，邓小平将党内团结起来，推行他的新威权主义理念，并组建了新的领导团队，之后他逐渐淡出政坛。江泽民是中共元首在天安门事件后由元老们推选的折衷人选，他成为邓小平新威权主义战略的有效执行者。在江泽民的领导下，中共将重心放在经济发展上，同时采取新策略来巩固其在快速变化的社会中的统治地位。党的生存战略的各个组成部分，例如基于绩效的合法性、精英阶层间的隐性安全契约、民族主义、社会收编和选择性镇压，逐渐演变为1989年后新威权秩序的关键支柱。

Judging by the economic boom and political tranquility at both the elite and mass levels in the post-Tiananmen era (1992-2012), Deng's neo-authoritarian vision had to be credited with bringing about the party's golden period and enabling the regime to weather the shocks of the Tiananmen debacle and the collapse of the Soviet Union. Behind the façade of stability and prosperity, however, new dangers began to emerge. The party's success in delivering rising standards of living, albeit on an investment-led growth model that would soon produce diminishing returns, reduced incentives for deeper and more difficult economic reforms. At the same time, the party's control of immense and fast-growing economic resources fueled corruption, exposing the fundamental flaws of Dengist neo-authoritarianism.

从后天安门时代（1992-2012年）精英阶层和大众层面的经济繁荣和政治稳定来看，邓小平的新威权主义理念被认为是中共黄金时期的缔造者，并使政权得以渡过天安门事件和苏联解体的冲击。然而，在稳定繁荣的表象之下，新的危险开始浮现。尽管中共成功地提高了人民的生活水平，但这种以投资为主导的增长模式很快就会出现收益递减，这削弱了进行更深入、更艰难的经济改革的动力。与此同时，中共对庞大且快速增长的经济资源的控制也助长了腐败，暴露了邓小平新威权主义的根本缺陷。





A Family "Vacation" That Changed History





一次改变历史的家庭“度假”


The brutal crushing of the Tiananmen protests on June 4, 1989, severely damaged Deng politically. The purge of Zhao Ziyang and other liberal reformers meant Deng could no longer rely on members of this group to implement his agenda of reform and opening. The octogenarian was said to be very depressed, and, after having given up smoking for several years, he began to smoke again.1 The only consolation for Deng was that he managed to install a compromise choice, Jiang Zemin, former party chief of Shanghai, as Zhao's replacement, thus preventing an ideological hard-liner from taking over the party's top leadership position. But Deng's power play failed to prevent the hard-liners from implementing policies to roll back the reforms of the 1980s as Jiang, a risk-averse opportunist with no power base of his own, lacked both the inclination and the ability to put up any resistance.

1989年6月4日，天安门事件遭到残酷镇压，邓小平的政治地位遭受重创。赵紫阳和其他自由派改革者的清洗意味着邓小平再也无法依靠这些人来推行他的改革开放政策。据说这位八旬老人情绪低落，戒烟数年后又重新开始吸烟。邓小平唯一的安慰是，他成功地安插了一位折衷人选——前上海市委书记江泽民——接替赵紫阳，从而避免了一位意识形态强硬派掌控党的最高领导权。然而，邓小平的权力博弈未能阻止强硬派推行旨在推翻20世纪80年代改革的政策，因为江泽民是一个规避风险的机会主义者，自身又没有权力基础，既没有意愿也没有能力进行任何抵抗。

Li Peng and Yao Yilin, the two arch conservatives in charge of economic policy, doubled down on an austerity program adopted in late 1988 to contain inflation. Although initially it prioritized reducing investment, in the wake of the Tiananmen crackdown they aggressively pushed for a recentralization of power and a reinvigoration of economic planning. These measures favored the SOEs at the expense of the nascent private sector.2

负责经济政策的两位保守派大佬李鹏和姚一林，为了抑制通货膨胀，加倍推行了1988年底开始实施的紧缩政策。尽管该政策最初侧重于减少投资，但在天安门事件后，他们积极推动权力集中化和经济计划的复兴。这些措施有利于国有企业，却损害了新兴的私营经济。

Consequently, the economy registered its weakest growth in a decade. GDP rose only 4.1 percent in 1989 and 3.9 percent in 1990, even though it rebounded to 9.5 percent in 1991.3

因此，经济增长创下十年来最低水平。1989年和1990年国内生产总值分别仅增长4.1%和3.9%，尽管1991年反弹至9.5%。

The TVEs, the largest component of the private sector, averaged an annual growth rate of 40 percent from 1985 to 1988, but in 1989 and 1990 they grew only 15 percent and 14 percent, respectively.4

中小型企业是私营部门的最大组成部分，1985年至1988年平均年增长率为40%，但1989年和1990年分别仅增长了15%和14%。

Hard-liners had less success in recentralizing the economy, however, as such efforts encountered strong resistance from the large and economically important provinces, such as Shanghai and Shandong.5

然而，强硬派在经济重整化方面收效甚微，因为这些努力遭到了上海、山东等经济大省的强烈抵制。

The political crackdown launched by the hard-liners targeting the participants in the prodemocracy movement produced mixed results at best. The regime successfully restored political control on university campuses.6 But its witch hunt for prodemocracy activists at the grassroots level largely failed due to resistance by sympathetic local officials.7 The hard-liners' thinly veiled ideological attacks on Deng's policy of reform and opening instantly encountered pushback from Deng himself.8 The overall political situation in the year and a half following the Tiananmen crackdown can be best described as a political stalemate.9 Although ascendant hard-liners had momentum to reverse Deng's reform and regain the party's eroded control over society, they were not fully successful. At the same time, the reformist camp led by Deng, now structurally weakened as the result of his purge of the liberals at the top, lacked strength to breathe new life into reform and opening. To outside observers, the Chinese regime in 1990 "showed many of the classic signs of a moribund system."10

强硬派针对民主运动参与者发起的政治镇压，充其量只能说是喜忧参半。政权成功恢复了对大学校园的政治控制。6 但由于同情民主运动人士的地方官员的抵制，其在基层对民主活动人士的“猎巫”行动大多以失败告终。7 强硬派对邓小平改革开放政策的隐晦意识形态攻击，立即遭到邓小平本人的反击。8 天安门事件后一年半的整体政治局势，可以用政治僵局来形容。9 尽管强硬派势力抬头，试图扭转邓小平的改革，重新夺回党对社会的掌控，但他们并未完全成功。与此同时，邓小平领导的改革派阵营，由于其对高层自由派的清洗，结构性地被削弱，无力为改革开放注入新的活力。在外部观察家看来，1990年的中国政权“呈现出许多垂死体制的典型特征”。

Deng, whose legacy was hanging in the balance, was reluctant to see his project of modernizing China wither in midcourse. In 1991 he began to take actions to revive his reform and opening.11 He first visited Shanghai in January 1991 and gave a series of speeches calling for "emancipating the mind" and taking bolder steps in reform and opening.12 Shortly after he returned from his visit, Deng elevated Zhu Rongji, the no-nonsense party chief and mayor of Shanghai, to the position of vice premier, even though Zhu was only an alternate member of the Central Committee (traditionally vice premiers were also Politburo members). The promotion of Zhu in April 1991 marked the beginning of the erosion of control of economic policy by the hard-liners in the State Council.

邓小平的政治遗产岌岌可危，他不愿看到自己为中国实现现代化所做的努力半途而废。1991年，他开始采取行动，重振改革开放。他于1991年1月首次访问上海，并发表了一系列讲话，呼吁“解放思想”，在改革开放方面采取更大胆的举措。访问上海后不久，邓小平提拔了务实的上海市委书记、市长朱镕基为国务院副总理，尽管朱镕基当时只是中央候补委员（传统上，副总理也是政治局委员）。1991年4月朱镕基的晋升，标志着国务院强硬派对经济政策的控制开始瓦解。

However useful these political maneuvers might have been for Deng, they were insufficient to change the political dynamics decisively in his favor. What really made the difference was the shock of the fall of the Soviet Union in late 1991. Judging by the rebound of the Chinese economy that year, the primary motivation behind Deng's last-ditch effort to salvage his legacy at the beginning of 1992 was not China's economic difficulties but the geopolitical and ideological environments that had been altered beyond recognition by the events in the Soviet Union.13

然而，尽管这些政治手段对邓小平或许有所帮助，但它们不足以从根本上改变政治格局，使之向有利于他的方向发展。真正起到决定性作用的是1991年底苏联解体的冲击。从当年中国经济的反弹来看，邓小平在1992年初为挽救其政治遗产而孤注一掷的主要动机并非中国的经济困境，而是苏联解体后地缘政治和意识形态环境发生的翻天覆地的变化。

On August 19, 1991, diehard conservatives in Moscow, in a desperate attempt to save the imploding Soviet Union, launched a coup. Initially, their counterparts in Beijing were thrilled. Some of them even proposed that they should publicly support the coup, but Deng quashed the idea and urged caution.14 If anything, the crisis in the Soviet Union reinforced Deng's conviction that only economic success could keep the CCP in power. The day after the coup, Deng stressed that the party's survival would largely depend on reform and opening. Instead of seeing the pending Soviet collapse as a crisis, he warned leading members of the Central Committee that "great changes are taking place in the world, and this gives us an opportunity.... If we don't seize this opportunity to raise the economy to a higher level, other countries will leap ahead of us, leaving us far behind."15

1991年8月19日，莫斯科的顽固保守派为了挽救即将崩溃的苏联，发动了政变。起初，北京的保守派对此感到欣喜若狂，甚至有人提议公开支持政变，但邓小平否决了这一想法，并敦促各方保持谨慎。苏联危机反而更加坚定了邓小平的信念：只有经济成功才能使中共继续执政。政变后的第二天，邓小平强调，党的生存很大程度上取决于改革开放。他没有将即将到来的苏联解体视为危机，而是警告中央委员会的领导成员：“世界正在发生巨大变化，这给我们带来了机遇……如果我们不抓住这个机遇，把经济提升到一个更高的水平，其他国家就会超越我们，把我们远远甩在后面。”

How Deng personally reacted to the dissolution of the USSR at the end of 1991 is unknown. However, three weeks after Gorbachev signed away the USSR, Deng embarked on his historic southern tour that would usher in the post-Tiananmen era of neo-authoritarianism. Ostensibly, the thirty-six-day trip that took Deng, then 87 years old, to several cities in the South was a family vacation. Before his train rolled out of Beijing on January 17, 1992, there was no indication that the political stalemate after the Tiananmen crackdown would end anytime soon. But by the time Deng returned to Beijing on February 21, he was on the verge of relaunching an economic revolution that would establish a new order: capitalist economic development under one-party rule and the route to modernization that Deng had consistently advocated since the late 1970s.16 Within a week of Deng's return, as a gesture of endorsing his views, the party distributed summaries of the speeches he had given during his tour. On March 9 and 10 the Politburo convened a rare two-day meeting (Politburo meetings usually last one day) and decided to implement the "spirit" of Deng's speeches.17 The political atmosphere in the country changed instantly afterward. After it became clear that Deng had regained dominance, provincial leaders vied with one another in calling for more rapid economic reform. Growth immediately exploded (GDP would rise 14 percent in 1992).18 By October 1992 Deng had installed a Politburo Standing Committee dominated by a new group of leaders who shared his neo-authoritarian vision (Li Peng, the premier, was the only surviving hard-liner in the top leadership).

邓小平本人对1991年底苏联解体的反应不得而知。然而，在戈尔巴乔夫签署苏联解体协议三周后，邓小平开始了具有历史意义的南方之行，开启了后天安门时代的新威权主义。表面上看，这趟为期36天的旅程，让当时87岁高龄的邓小平走访了南方的几个城市，是一次家庭旅行。在他于1992年1月17日乘火车离开北京之前，没有任何迹象表明天安门事件后的政治僵局会很快结束。但到2月21日邓小平返回北京时，他已接近重启一场经济革命，这场革命将建立一种新的秩序：一党专政下的资本主义经济发展，以及邓小平自20世纪70年代末以来一直倡导的现代化道路。邓小平回国一周内，为了表示支持他的观点，党内分发了他巡视期间讲话的摘要。3月9日至10日，政治局召开了一次罕见的为期两天的会议（政治局会议通常持续一天），决定贯彻落实邓小平讲话的“精神”。此后，中国的政治氛围立即发生了变化。在邓小平重新掌权之后，各省领导人竞相呼吁加快经济改革。经济增长立即爆发（1992 年 GDP 将增长 14%）。到 1992 年 10 月，邓小平已经建立了一个由一群认同他新威权主义理念的新领导人主导的政治局常委（总理李鹏是最高领导层中唯一幸存的强硬派）。

There is no single answer to the question of how a monthlong "family trip" by a retired 87-year-old leader, whose only title at that time was "honorary chairman of the China Bridge Association," could change the course of Chinese history.

对于一位退休的 87 岁领导人（当时他唯一的头衔是“中国桥牌协会名誉主席”）为期一个月的“家庭旅行”如何改变中国历史进程这个问题，并没有一个简单的答案。

At the level of elite politics, the most important impact of Deng's tour was to force Jiang Zemin, who had toed a more conservative line since his appointment as party chief in June 1989, to fully embrace Deng's policy. Based on one unofficial, but apparently authentic, version of the summaries of the talks by Deng during his tour, Deng could barely conceal his deep dissatisfaction with the post-Tiananmen leadership, and he implicitly threatened to sack Jiang.19 In addition, Deng talked at length about the fall of the Soviet Union. "What I have been thinking about the most these days," Deng allegedly told his audience in Shenzhen, "is the Soviet Union. This is a country with such bountiful natural resources, a deep cultural tradition, a powerful state, and a huge Communist Party. But it collapsed overnight." (Ironically, Xi Jinping would be reflecting on the Soviet collapse in nearly identical language two decades later after he assumed the position of party chief in November 2012.) Deng's diagnosis of the Soviet collapse was its economic failure ("it could not even fill up the bellies of its people," to use his colorful language). If China failed economically, Deng warned, "today's Soviet Union will be tomorrow's China."20

在政治精英层面，邓小平此次巡视最重要的影响是迫使自1989年6月担任中共中央总书记以来一直奉行更为保守路线的江泽民全面接受邓小平的政策。根据一份非官方但显然真实的邓小平巡视期间会谈记录，邓小平几乎无法掩饰他对天安门事件后领导层的强烈不满，并含蓄地威胁要撤换江泽民。此外，邓小平还详细谈到了苏联的解体。据称，邓小平在深圳对听众说：“这些天我一直在思考的就是苏联。这是一个拥有如此丰富的自然资源、深厚的文化传统、强大的国家和庞大的共产党的国家。但它却在一夜之间崩溃了。” （具有讽刺意味的是，二十年后，习近平在2012年11月就任中共中央总书记后，以几乎相同的措辞反思了苏联的解体。）邓小平对苏联解体的诊断是其经济失败（用他生动的话说，“连人民的肚子都养不活”）。邓小平警告说，如果中国经济失败，“今天的苏联就会成为明天的中国”。

Deng's threat to dismiss Jiang in early 1992 seems credible. A well-connected Chinese journalist, Yang Jisheng, writes that Deng was disappointed with Jiang, and he implied that Jiang should step aside if he would not support reform more aggressively. Later, Deng did not sack Jiang, but this was only because he was dissuaded by a close associate, veteran revolutionary Bo Yibo. Ezra Vogel also claims that Jiang, in February 1992, was aware that Deng was "determined" to fire him if he did not support reform.21

邓小平在1992年初威胁要解雇江泽民，这似乎并非空穴来风。一位与中国政界关系密切的记者杨继生写道，邓小平对江泽民感到失望，并暗示如果江泽民不更积极地支持改革，就应该下台。后来，邓小平最终没有解雇江泽民，但这仅仅是因为他受到了亲信、资深革命家薄一波的劝阻。埃兹拉·沃格尔也声称，江泽民在1992年2月就已经知道，如果他不支持改革，邓小平“决心”要解雇他。

With his job on the line, Jiang decided to back Deng's agenda wholeheartedly. Even though in 1992 Jiang had not yet consolidated power, the shift in his position from a fence-sitting opportunist to a supporter of Deng's renewed call for economic reform decisively tipped the balance at the top of the leadership in favor of Deng's policy. In addition, by early 1992 the major aging hard-liners were either in poor health or dying. The eighty-six-year-old Chen Yun, the leader of the conservative camp who might have been able to resist Deng's offensive, was apparently in poor health and politically inactive. (Chen died in April 1995.)22

由于工作岌岌可危，江泽民决定全力支持邓小平的政策。尽管1992年江泽民尚未完全巩固权力，但他从一个摇摆不定的机会主义者转变为邓小平重启经济改革的支持者，这一转变彻底扭转了领导层内部的局势，使邓小平的政策占据了上风。此外，到1992年初，主要的强硬派领导人要么年迈体弱，要么已去世。保守派领袖陈云，这位86岁高龄的老人，原本或许能够抵挡邓小平的攻势，但显然健康状况不佳，且已不再活跃于政坛。（陈云于1995年4月去世。）

In terms of policy, the conservative forces could not put up any resistance because by 1992 they had no credibility left. Their retrograde economic policies had produced the worst two-year growth record since 1979. The implosion of the Soviet Union, the party's model, fully revealed the ideological bankruptcy of orthodox communism. While Deng had laid out a strategy to keep the CCP in power in the changed world that was becoming implacably hostile to communism, the hard-liners simply had no alternatives to offer. Deng's call for accelerated economic development also resonated with the public. One alternative to this path—reversion to a planned economy and totalitarian social control—hardly sounded attractive to people who still remembered the dark era of Maoism. The other alternative—economic modernization concurrent with political liberalization—was impractical. The Tiananmen crackdown had dealt a fatal blow to the (already weak) prodemocracy forces at all levels. Their patron in the top leadership, Zhao Ziyang, had been purged. Leading liberal intellectuals and activists had been either exiled or imprisoned. The political control imposed after the Tiananmen crackdown eliminated any public space for advocating political change.23

在政策方面，保守势力无力抵抗，因为到1992年，他们已经丧失了所有信誉。他们倒退的经济政策导致了自1979年以来最糟糕的两年经济增长记录。苏联的解体——中共的模式——彻底暴露了正统共产主义意识形态的破产。尽管邓小平制定了在对共产主义日益敌视的世界中维持中共政权的战略，但强硬派却拿不出任何替代方案。邓小平呼吁加快经济发展也引起了民众的共鸣。另一种选择——回归计划经济和极权社会控制——对于那些仍然记得毛泽东时代黑暗历史的人来说，几乎没有任何吸引力。另一种选择——经济现代化与政治自由化同步进行——也不切实际。天安门事件对各级（本已虚弱的）民主力量造成了致命打击。他们在最高领导层的支持者赵紫阳遭到清洗。主要的自由派知识分子和活动家要么被流放，要么被监禁。天安门事件后实施的政治控制消除了任何倡导政治变革的公共空间。

Under these circumstances, a neo-authoritarian path appeared to offer something for everybody. For those determined to perpetuate one-party rule, this survival strategy was the most pragmatic and promising. For those seeking to reform the one-party regime, economic modernization could be a roundabout way to liberalize or even democratize the dictatorship. For the vast majority of Chinese people, with a per capita income of only 1,262 in purchasing power parity in 1992, a ruling regime bent on economic development appeared to be much better than one that was not.24

在这种情况下，新威权主义道路似乎能满足各方需求。对于那些决心维护一党专政的人来说，这种生存策略最为务实且前景光明。对于那些寻求改革一党专政的人来说，经济现代化或许是实现独裁政权自由化甚至民主化的迂回途径。对于绝大多数中国民众而言，1992年人均收入按购买力平价计算仅为1262元，一个致力于经济发展的政权似乎远胜于一个不致力于经济发展的政权。

Lastly, the Soviet factor likely had a major, albeit difficult to measure, impact on the attitudes of ordinary Chinese people toward their government. The chaos in the wake of the Soviet collapse, which the Chinese government portrayed in apocalyptic terms through official propaganda, probably made ordinary Chinese, for whom the turmoil of the Cultural Revolution was recent memory, prefer order and stability to change that might bring about a calamity on the order of the Soviet collapse. Indeed, opinion surveys conducted in the early 1990s show a surprisingly high level of support for the CCP. In addition to the party's satisfactory economic performance, an important source of support was fear of social instability.25

最后，苏联因素可能对普通中国民众对政府的态度产生了重大影响，尽管这种影响难以衡量。苏联解体后的混乱局面，被中国政府通过官方宣传以世界末日般的语气描绘出来，这可能导致普通中国民众——他们对文化大革命的动荡记忆犹新——更倾向于秩序和稳定，而不是可能带来类似苏联解体灾难的变革。事实上，20世纪90年代初进行的民意调查显示，民众对中国共产党的支持率出奇地高。除了党在经济方面取得的令人满意的成绩外，民众对社会不稳定的担忧也是其支持的重要来源。

After turning the tide with his southern tour, Deng immediately set about to rearrange the party's top leadership to ensure that his neo-authoritarian survival strategy would be faithfully implemented. Because Chen Yun had largely abandoned his opposition to Deng's policy, partially due to his poor health, Deng had near-complete freedom to pick the top leaders at the Fourteenth Party Congress in October 1992.26 Judging by the line-up of the top leadership chosen at the congress, Deng scored a total political triumph. The Central Committee featured a number of technocrats who could be trusted with the mission of supercharging economic development.27 Of the seven members of the PSC, Deng could count on six to carry out his policy, including Jiang Zemin (general secretary), Zhu Rongji (executive vice premier), and Hu Jintao (a rising star whom Deng anointed as Jiang's successor). The only conservative on the PSC was Premier Li Peng.

邓小平南巡扭转局势后，立即着手重组党的最高领导层，以确保其新威权主义生存战略得以忠实执行。由于陈云身体欠佳，已基本放弃反对邓小平的政策，邓小平在1992年10月召开的中共十四大上几乎可以完全自由地挑选最高领导人。从大会选出的最高领导层来看，邓小平取得了彻底的政治胜利。中央委员会由一批技术官僚组成，他们肩负着推动经济发展的重任。在七名国家政治保卫委员会委员中，有六人可以依靠邓小平执行其政策，包括江泽民（总书记）、朱镕基（常务副总理）和胡锦涛（邓小平钦定的江泽民接班人）。国家政治保卫委员会中唯一的保守派是总理李鹏。

Deng's anointment of Hu Jintao, then 50 years old, as Jiang's successor likely reflected his fear that there might be a succession struggle after Jiang completed his second full term as party chief in 2002. Such a fight not only would be destabilizing but would probably result in elevating a leader to the top who could threaten Deng's legacies. Deng's choice of Hu, a party apparatchik with a thin record of accomplishments, remains a puzzle. Since Deng hardly knew Hu personally because Hu was nearly forty years younger and had not worked under him directly, it is very likely that Deng had relied on the recommendation of close associate and Hu's lifelong patron Song Ping, a conservative and member of the PSC (1989-1992). Deng might have also been reassured by Hu's loyalty to the party because, as party chief in Tibet beginning in 1988, he had ordered martial law and had crushed the protests by Tibetans in March 1989, several months before the Tiananmen massacre. At the same time, Hu had not demonstrated any opposition to market-oriented reforms. Under these circumstances, Hu Jintao apparently was the safest choice as a future leader.28

邓小平钦点时年50岁的胡锦涛接替江泽民，很可能反映了他对江泽民2002年第二个完整任期结束后可能出现权力交接之争的担忧。这样的争斗不仅会造成政局动荡，而且很可能导致一位可能威胁邓小平政治遗产的领导人登上权力巅峰。邓小平选择政绩平平的胡锦涛，至今仍令人费解。由于胡锦涛比邓小平年轻近40岁，且从未直接在其麾下工作，邓小平与他本人几乎素不相识，因此很可能是采纳了胡锦涛的亲信、长期支持者宋平的推荐。宋平是一位保守派人士，曾于1989年至1992年担任国家政治保卫委员会委员。邓小平或许也因胡锦涛对党的忠诚而感到安心，因为胡锦涛自1988年起担任西藏地方委书记，曾下令实施戒严，并在1989年3月镇压了藏人的抗议活动，而这距离天安门事件仅几个月之遥。与此同时，胡锦涛并未表现出对市场化改革的任何反对。在这种情况下，胡锦涛显然是未来领导人最稳妥的选择。





Intellectual Foundations of the Post-Tiananmen Order





天安门事件后秩序的知识基础


Intellectually, the CCP's survival strategy in the post-Tiananmen era was derived, in most part, from the developmental successes of the East Asian countries (in particular South Korea, Taiwan, and Singapore) under authoritarian rule from the 1960s to the 1980s and, after the Soviet collapse, from their own interpretation of the causes of the failure of the Soviet regime. "Neo-authoritarian developmentalism"—a combination of pro-market reforms, integration with the West-dominated global economy, and authoritarian rule—probably best summarizes the essence of Deng's strategy of economic modernization. As indicated by his speeches emphasizing both economic development and preservation of the CCP's political monopoly (the most important of his "four cardinal principles"), from the outset neo-authoritarian developmentalism was the ideological inspiration of Deng's reform and opening, even though he never invoked the term in his public speeches. The only credible piece of evidence that Deng embraced the concept is provided by Zhao Ziyang, who said that Deng commented to him in a meeting in 1988 that "neo-authoritarianism"—economic development in a stable environment under the rule of a strongman—"is my position, but there is no need to frame it in such a way."29

从思想层面来看，中共在后天安门时代的生存战略，很大程度上源于东亚国家（特别是韩国、台湾和新加坡）在20世纪60年代至80年代威权统治下取得的发展成就，以及苏联解体后，中共自身对苏联政权失败原因的解读。“新威权发展主义”——结合了亲市场改革、融入西方主导的全球经济以及威权统治——或许最能概括邓小平经济现代化战略的本质。正如他强调经济发展和维护中共政治垄断（这是他“四大原则”中最重要的一项）的讲话所表明的那样，尽管邓小平从未在公开讲话中提及“新威权发展主义”一词，但它从一开始就是邓小平改革开放的意识形态基础。唯一可信的证据表明邓小平接受了这一理念，赵紫阳称，邓小平在1988年的一次会面中曾对他说，“新威权主义”——在强人统治下，于稳定的环境中实现经济发展——“是我的立场，但没必要这样表述。”

Indeed, the concept of “neo-authoritarianism” had become a hot topic in 1988 in China’s intellectual circles due to advocacy by a group of young and middle-aged scholars with conservative leanings participating in a larger debate on China’s optimal path forward. Although there is no evidence that hardliners were behind the proponents of neo-authoritarianism at the time, the idea of an authoritarian regime committed to economic development held tremendous appeal and was seen among its advocates as an alternative to the model of development under a liberal political regime.30 In terms of real-world examples, champions of neo-authoritarianism could find persuasive cases supporting their argument. South Korea, Taiwan, Singapore, and to a less extent Thailand, Indonesia, and Malaysia had achieved spectacular developmental successes since the 1960s under authoritarian rule. Even though no academic research explicitly argues that authoritarian rule made such economic success possible, the connection between authoritarianism and rapid economic development appears intuitively obvious.31 Although neo-authoritarianism was the guiding principle of Deng’s reform and opening prior to its ascendance in scholarly circles in 1987–1988, Deng had encountered great difficulty completely translating this vision into policy because of opposition, primarily from the hard-liners and secondarily from the liberals. The hard-liners, led by Chen Yun, steadfastly resisted Deng’s efforts to liberalize the Chinese economy, while the liberals advocated political reform even though they supported Deng on economic policy. The decimation of the liberals as a political force after the Tiananmen crackdown in 1989 eliminated one set of obstacles to Deng’s neo-authoritarian vision. After the Soviet collapse in 1991, hard-liner opposition to a survival strategy that would rely on capitalist economic development to perpetuate one-party rule also melted away.

事实上，“新威权主义”的概念在1988年成为中国知识界的热门话题，这源于一群倾向保守主义的中青年学者在一场关于中国未来发展道路的更广泛辩论中对其的倡导。尽管没有证据表明当时强硬派是新威权主义倡导者的幕后推手，但致力于经济发展的威权政体理念具有巨大的吸引力，并被其支持者视为自由政治体制下发展模式的替代方案。30 就现实世界的案例而言，新威权主义的拥护者可以找到令人信服的例子来支持他们的论点。自20世纪60年代以来，韩国、台湾、新加坡，以及在某种程度上泰国、印度尼西亚和马来西亚，都在威权统治下取得了令人瞩目的发展成就。尽管没有学术研究明确论证威权统治促成了如此巨大的经济成功，但威权主义与经济快速发展之间的联系似乎显而易见。31 尽管新威权主义在1987-1988年学术界兴起之前一直是邓小平改革开放的指导原则，但由于主要来自强硬派、其次来自自由派的反对，邓小平在将这一理念完全转化为政策方面遇到了巨大困难。以陈云为首的强硬派坚决抵制邓小平改革中国经济的努力，而自由派虽然在经济政策上支持邓小平，却主张政治改革。1989年天安门事件后，自由派政治力量的衰落消除了邓小平推行新威权主义理念的一大障碍。1991年苏联解体后，强硬派反对依靠资本主义经济发展来维持一党专政的生存策略的势力也随之瓦解。

Besides bolstering Deng's neo-authoritarian strategy, the Soviet collapse also informed the CCP's survival strategy in many important ways.32 In the 1990s the Chinese leadership tasked the country's social scientists with carrying out a number of studies probing the factors responsible for the Soviet collapse. Not surprisingly, these studies reached very different and contradictory conclusions. In general, the liberal scholars pinned the blame on the inefficient economic system, imperial overreach, corruption, and the rigidity of the Soviet regime, but the conservative academics attributed the Soviet collapse mainly to Mikhail Gorbachev's policies of glasnost and perestroika and to the "peaceful evolution" advocated by the West.33 The conservative interpretation of the Soviet collapse would become the dominant official narrative and would influence the CCP's strategy of suppressing domestic dissent and guarding against Western influence in the post-Tiananmen era. But two conclusions drawn by liberal scholars—the Soviet regime's failure to reform its economy and its imperial overreach—had a profound impact on the party's survival strategy during this period. To be sure, credit for these two observations should go first to Deng himself because he not only had pointed out that economic failure would doom the party but also had insisted that China "must never take the lead" in confronting the West.34

除了强化邓小平的新威权主义战略外，苏联解体也在许多重要方面影响了中共的生存战略。20世纪90年代，中国领导层责成国内社会科学家开展一系列研究，探究导致苏联解体的因素。不出所料，这些研究得出了截然不同甚至相互矛盾的结论。总体而言，自由派学者将苏联解体归咎于低效的经济体制、帝国主义的过度扩张、腐败以及苏联政权的僵化；而保守派学者则主要将苏联解体归因于戈尔巴乔夫的公开性和改革政策，以及西方倡导的“和平演进”。保守派对苏联解体的解读逐渐成为官方的主流叙事，并影响了中共在后天安门时代压制国内异议和防范西方影响的战略。但自由派学者得出的两个结论——苏联政权未能成功进行经济改革以及其帝国主义扩张过度——对这一时期中共的生存战略产生了深远的影响。当然，这两个观点的功劳首先应归于邓小平本人，因为他不仅指出经济失败将导致中共的覆灭，而且还坚持认为中国在对抗西方时“绝不能带头”。

The lessons the Chinese leadership derived from the Soviet collapse, albeit eclectically, complemented Deng's neo-authoritarian vision almost perfectly and guided the party's domestic and foreign policies until the rise of Xi Jinping at the end of 2012. Domestically, the Soviet collapse underscored the centrality of economic development for the party's performance-based legitimacy, thus justifying bold market-oriented reforms and integration with the global economy. In foreign relations, the post-Tiananmen leadership faithfully followed Deng's dictum of taoguan yanghui (hiding your brightness and building up strength) and took great pains to avoid conflict with the United States. At the same time, however, the party also methodically strengthened social control to guard against "peaceful evolution," systematically cultivated nationalism to augment regime legitimacy, carried out a campaign of co-opting the social elites to expand its base of support, and consistently maintained control of the key sectors of the economy to prevent the market reforms from undermining the economic foundations of one-party rule. To be sure, the party's post-Deng leadership arrived at this comprehensive survival strategy mainly through learning and adaptation.35 Yet, judging by the party's success in economic growth and regime survival in the two decades following Deng's southern tour, the core ideas of neo-authoritarianism and the lessons from the Soviet collapse can claim a great deal of credit for the golden age of one-party rule in China from 1992 to 2012.

中国领导层从苏联解体中汲取的经验教训，尽管不尽相同，却几乎完美地契合了邓小平的新威权主义理念，并指导了中共的内外政策，直至2012年底习近平上台。在国内，苏联解体凸显了经济发展对于中共基于绩效的执政合法性的核心地位，从而为大胆的市场化改革和融入全球经济提供了正当理由。在外交方面，后天安门时代的领导层忠实地遵循了邓小平“埋头积强”的原则，并竭力避免与美国发生冲突。然而，与此同时，中共也系统性地加强社会控制，以防范“和平演进”；系统性地培育民族主义，以增强政权合法性；开展拉拢社会精英的运动，以扩大其支持基础；并始终保持对经济关键部门的控制，以防止市场改革动摇一党专政的经济基础。诚然，邓小平之后的中共领导层主要通过学习和适应，才形成了这一全面的生存战略。然而，从邓小平南巡后二十年间中共在经济增长和政权存续方面取得的成功来看，新威权主义的核心思想以及从苏联解体中汲取的经验教训，对1992年至2012年中国一党专政的黄金时代起到了至关重要的作用。





Key Pillars of the Post-Tiananmen Order





天安门事件后秩序的关键支柱


The neo-authoritarian order, beginning with Deng's historic southern tour in 1992 and ending with Xi Jinping's takeover as party chief in November 2012, lasted about two decades. In addition to producing the Chinese economic "miracle" during this period, the post-Tiananmen order was characterized by ideological consensus among the elite on policy, collective leadership and power-sharing at the top, an implicit security pact among the rulers, and recruitment and promotion of elites apparently based on established rules and norms. These observed features of elite politics deviated substantially from those that had characterized all other periods in post-1949 China. During the Maoist period (1949-1976), personalist strongman rule and constant purges dominated elite politics, as has been the case in Xi's "new era" since 2013. During the 1980s, ideological differences led to bitter conflicts over policy and triggered the fall of two general secretaries. What made post-Tiananmen elite politics relatively stable has fueled a vigorous debate about the role of institutions and power in the post-Deng era.

从邓小平1992年历史性的南巡开始，到习近平2012年11月接任中共中央总书记结束，这一新威权秩序持续了约二十年。除了在此期间创造了中国经济“奇迹”之外，后天安门时代的秩序还具有以下特征：精英阶层在政策上达成意识形态共识；高层实行集体领导和权力分享；统治者之间存在着一种隐性的安全契约；精英的招募和晋升似乎都遵循着既定的规则和规范。这些精英政治的特征与1949年以后中国其他时期截然不同。在毛泽东时代（1949-1976年），个人强人统治和持续不断的清洗主导着精英政治，正如习近平2013年以来的“新时代”一样。在20世纪80年代，意识形态分歧导致了激烈的政策冲突，并引发了两位总书记的下台。天安门事件后精英政治相对稳定的原因引发了关于邓小平后时代制度和权力作用的激烈辩论。

One obvious factor behind this development was the smooth exit of the revolutionary veterans, which began in the early 1990s and ended with Deng's death in February 1997. The transition from revolutionary veterans to a new and younger generation of well-educated technocrats (Jiang Zemin was the first party chief with a college education) took place without incident, mainly due to Deng's political maneuvering in 1992. The meltdown of opposition to his neo-authoritarian vision allowed him to appoint a leadership team that could implement his agenda of keeping the party in power through supercharged economic development. By pure coincidence, but crucially, nearly all the heavyweight hard-liners died before Deng. Their departure removed a potential threat to the new leadership to which Deng had entrusted his unfinished agenda. To be sure, a small number of slightly younger hard-liners were still alive. But shorn of powerful patrons and official positions, they could do little more than occasionally rail against a "capitalist restoration."36 The marginalization of the hard-liners after 1992 and the purge of the liberals in 1989 allowed the new leadership to pursue Deng's agenda without distraction or debilitating infighting.

这一发展背后的一个显而易见的因素是革命老将们的平稳退出，这一过程始于20世纪90年代初，止于邓小平1997年2月的逝世。从革命老将到新一代受过良好教育的、更年轻的技术官僚（江泽民是第一位拥有大学学历的党的总书记）的过渡进行得十分顺利，这主要归功于邓小平在1992年的政治运作。反对他新威权主义理念的力量瓦解，使他得以任命一个能够通过大力发展经济来巩固党的执政纲领的领导团队。纯属巧合，但至关重要的是，几乎所有重量级的强硬派都在邓小平之前去世。他们的离世消除了对新领导层的潜在威胁，而邓小平将他未竟的事业托付给了这个新领导层。当然，当时仍有一些稍年轻的强硬派在世。但由于失去了强大的支持者和官方职位，他们除了偶尔抨击“资本主义复辟”之外，几乎无能为力。1992 年后强硬派的边缘化和 1989 年自由派的清洗，使得新领导层能够不受干扰或内讧影响地推行邓小平的政策。

After Deng selected the new leadership team at the Fourteenth Party Congress in October 1992, he receded from the scene. According to his official chronology, his last public appearance was in February 1994, about three years before his death on February 19, 1997. It was during this period that the foundations of the post-Tiananmen political order were laid. Despite his reputation as an opportunist, Jiang Zemin had by then become fully committed to Deng's vision and started to implement Deng's neo-authoritarian agenda with few reservations.

1992年10月，邓小平在中共十四大上选出新的领导班子后，便淡出了公众视野。据官方记载，他最后一次公开露面是在1994年2月，大约在他1997年2月19日去世前三年。正是在这一时期，后天安门时代的政治秩序奠定了基础。尽管江泽民素有投机取巧之名，但此时他已完全认同邓小平的理念，并开始几乎毫无保留地推行邓小平的新威权主义路线。

In November 1993 Jiang shepherded approval of a landmark document at the Third Plenum of the Fourteenth Central Committee. "The CCP Center's Resolution on Several Questions on Establishing Institutions of a Socialist Market Economy" legitimized, for the first time, the status of the market economy, representing the ideological breakthrough that had eluded Deng throughout the 1980s. The resolution also laid out a blueprint for the radical economic reforms that the hard-liners had bitterly opposed in the prior decade. The fifty provisions of the resolution include plans to reform the SOEs, develop the underlying institutions of a market economy, encourage the growth of the private sector, establish mechanisms of macroeconomic management, expand the opening to the world economy, and build a modern legal system.37

1993年11月，江泽民在中共十四届三中全会上主导通过了一份具有里程碑意义的文件——《关于建立社会主义市场经济制度若干问题的中央决议》。该决议首次确立了市场经济的地位，标志着邓小平在整个20世纪80年代都未能实现的意识形态突破。决议还为激进的经济改革制定了蓝图，而强硬派在过去十年中一直强烈反对这些改革。决议的五十条规定包括改革国有企业、发展市场经济的基本制度、鼓励私营部门发展、建立宏观经济管理机制、扩大对外开放以及构建现代法律体系等。





Institutionalization of the Party and the Balance of Power





党的制度化与权力平衡


Compared with the preceding Maoist and Dengist periods as well as the subsequent Xi era, the post-Tiananmen era stands out for its normality and stability. No earth-shaking political events on the order of the Cultural Revolution, the Tiananmen crackdown, or Xi's unrelenting purge took place during this period. Although Jiang Zemin and Hu Jintao each sent a rival Politburo member to prison, these incidents are notable mainly because they were so rare. Throughout this period, China's rulers conducted their business seemingly according to a set of written rules and unwritten norms, of which the most important and effective appear to have been those governing the recruitment and promotion of officials on the basis of their age, educational qualifications, and administrative record and the disciplining and punishment of party members suspected of corruption.

与之前的毛泽东时代、邓小平时代以及随后的习近平时代相比，后天安门时代以其秩序井然和稳定著称。这一时期没有发生像文化大革命、天安门事件或习近平持续不断的清洗那样惊天动地的政治事件。尽管江泽民和胡锦涛都曾将政敌送进监狱，但这些事件之所以引人注目，主要是因为它们极为罕见。在此期间，中国的统治者似乎都遵循着一套成文的规则和不成文的规范行事，其中最重要、最有效的似乎是那些根据年龄、学历和行政记录来选拔和晋升官员，以及对涉嫌腐败的党员进行惩戒和惩罚的规则。

To be sure, the idea of making elite politics more rule-based originated in the early 1980s, as exemplified by "Guidelines on Political Life in the Party" passed by the Central Committee in 1980.38 However, few specific rules on governance within the party were formulated in the 1980s. One of Jiang's top priorities in the early to mid-1990s was to promulgate specific rules and regulations governing key procedures for appointment, promotion, discipline, and administration of local party committees. Some of the party's most important regulations, such as the Trial Regulations on the Selection and Appointment of Party and Government Leading Cadres (1995) and the Regulations on Chinese Communist Party Discipline and Sanctions (1997), were promulgated under Jiang's leadership. (The project of subjecting politics within the party to more rules continued under Hu Jintao, who updated the interim rules passed by Jiang and rolled out new ones.)39

诚然，精英政治更加规则化的理念起源于20世纪80年代初，例如1980年中央通过的《党内政治生活指导原则》。然而，80年代鲜有关于党内治理的具体规则出台。20世纪90年代初中期，江泽民的首要任务之一是颁布关于地方党委任命、晋升、纪律处分和管理等关键程序的具体规章制度。一些最重要的党规，例如《党政领导干部遴选和任命试行条例》（1995年）和《中国共产党纪律和制裁条例》（1997年），都是在江泽民的领导下颁布的。 （胡锦涛继续推进党内政治规则的制定，他更新了江泽民时期通过的临时规则，并推出了新的规则。）

The stipulations in these rules and norms provided the party with significant benefits. Making certain measurable qualifications—such as age, education attainment, and record of administrative competence (mainly in terms of economic management)—some of the considerations for recruiting and promoting officials helped add youthful vigor and technocratic capabilities to the party's local apparatus. The value placed on administrative experience in different capacities and different sectors enabled the party to train and promote well-rounded officials. The concomitant de-emphasis on ideology allowed the party to confine disagreements to policy and personality, not to polarizing debate over ideological values.

这些规则和规范中的规定给党带来了显著的益处。将年龄、教育程度和行政能力（主要体现在经济管理方面）等可衡量的资格条件纳入招募和晋升官员的考量范围，有助于为党的基层机构注入青春活力和技术官僚能力。对不同岗位和不同领域行政经验的重视，使党能够培养和提拔全面发展的官员。与此同时，对意识形态的弱化使得党能够将分歧限制在政策和个人层面，而不是陷入意识形态价值观的激烈争论。

Nonetheless, rules on "meritocracy" and administrative accomplishments could be gamed by clever local officials. For instance, officials without a genuine four-year college education could burnish their credentials with degrees obtained through less rigorous college or graduate programs. Xi Jinping, for example, received a doctorate from the prestigious Tsinghua University via a correspondence program in the late 1990s while he served as the governor of Fujian province. The practice of faking economic data to embellish one's record was widespread. Cultivating ties with superiors, often through illicit means such as bribes, could advance an official's career.40 Such meritocracy appeared to apply to the promotion of local officials more strictly than to national-level officials as patronage—personal ties to senior leaders in the party—played a decisive role in the selection of members of the Central Committee who typically staff the most important political and administrative positions in the party-state.41

然而，精明的官员可能会钻“精英选拔”和行政成就的空子。例如，一些没有真正四年制大学学历的官员可以通过一些要求较低的大学或研究生项目获得的学位来粉饰自己的资历。例如，习近平在20世纪90年代末担任福建省省长期间，就通过函授项目获得了清华大学的博士学位。伪造经济数据以美化个人政绩的做法十分普遍。与上级建立关系，通常通过贿赂等非法手段，可以促进官员的晋升。这种精英选拔制度似乎对地方官员的晋升比对国家级官员的晋升更为严格，因为裙带关系——即与党内高层领导人的私人关系——在中央委员的选拔中起着决定性作用，而中央委员通常占据着党国中最重要的政治和行政职位。

Yet, despite these flaws, codified rules and implicit norms on elite politics helped the party recruit more talented individuals and keep them committed to the party out of self-interest. At a minimum, these rules and norms provided them with a career road map for upward mobility inside the party-state. Enforced limits on term (usually two terms in the same position) and age (the mandatory retirement age was 60 for officials with the rank of vice minister or deputy provincial governor, while ministers and governors were required to retire at 65) accelerated elite circulation as officials reaching these limits were forced to retire and give way to a younger cohort. This allowed the party to avoid the Maoist-era problem when the absence of age and term limits enabled the revolutionary veterans to stay in office indefinitely, blocking the careers of younger officials. These frustrated followers of the party played an outsized role in toppling the old guard at the beginning of the Cultural Revolution.42

然而，尽管存在这些缺陷，成文的规则和关于精英政治的隐性规范仍然帮助党招募了更多人才，并出于自身利益使他们忠于党。至少，这些规则和规范为他们提供了在党国内部向上流动的职业路线图。对任期（通常同一职位最多两届）和年龄（副部长或省副省长级官员的强制退休年龄为60岁，部长和省长级官员的强制退休年龄为65岁）的强制限制加速了精英的更迭，因为达到这些限制的官员被迫退休，为更年轻的一代让路。这使得党避免了毛泽东时代的问题，当时由于没有年龄和任期限制，革命老将可以无限期地留在岗位上，阻碍了年轻官员的职业发展。这些对党感到不满的追随者在文化大革命初期推翻旧势力的过程中发挥了举足轻重的作用。

To avoid alienating a large group of officials forced into mandatory retirement, the party appointed them as deputies to local people's congresses or people's political consultative conferences (an advisory body). Those officials who retired from frontline responsibilities also retained their perks, such as generous retirement benefits, government-provided housing, and access to high-quality healthcare. They could count on support and services provided by a special bureaucracy, the "Veteran Cadres Bureau," which originally had been set up in the central government in the 1980s to cater to the needs of the octogenarian revolutionaries but had been expanded to all levels of the party-state in the 1990s. Although maintaining an ever-growing number of officials in their early sixties consumed enormous resources, the party had no trouble covering the expenses because the coffers of the state were flush with tax revenues generated from the rapidly expanding economy.

为了避免疏远一大批被迫强制退休的官员，党任命他们为地方人民代表大会或人民政治协商会议（一个咨询机构）的代表。这些从一线岗位退休的官员也保留了他们的福利，例如优厚的退休金、政府提供的住房和优质的医疗保健。他们可以依靠一个专门的机构——“老干部局”——提供的支持和服务。该机构最初于20世纪80年代在中央政府设立，旨在满足八十多岁革命者的需求，但在20世纪90年代扩展到党国各级。尽管维持越来越多六十岁出头的官员需要耗费巨资，但由于经济快速增长带来的税收充裕，国家财政收入充裕，党并不愁没有这笔开支。

Unlike during the Maoist and the Dengist eras, elite politics during the period when Jiang was effectively in charge (1993-2002) was marked by a degree of stability and collective leadership that was unmatched in all other periods of PRC history, except for the Hu era (2003-2012). When Mao ruled the party, he conducted ceaseless purges to get rid of his enemies, including his two designated successors (Liu Shaoqi and Lin Biao). In the 1980s Deng's disenchantment with his own protégés, Hu Yaobang and Zhao Ziyang, ultimately led to their ouster from power.

与毛泽东时代和邓小平时代不同，江泽民实际掌权时期（1993-2002年）的精英政治展现出前所未有的稳定性和集体领导，这在中华人民共和国历史上除胡耀邦时代（2003-2012年）外，其他任何时期都无法比拟。毛泽东执政时期，他不断进行清洗以清除异己，包括他指定的两位接班人（刘少奇和林彪）。20世纪80年代，邓小平对他的两位亲信胡耀邦和赵紫阳感到失望，最终导致他们被赶下台。

By contrast, the end of bitter ideological feuding after 1992 dramatically bolstered elite unity in the post-Tiananmen era. Jiang did not carry out any mass purges during his time as general secretary, even though he occasionally did conduct half-hearted anticorruption campaigns, mainly targeting mid-level officials.43 Only a personal rival, Politburo member Chen Xitong, was imprisoned on corruption charges in 1995 (an act of poetic justice in the eyes of many because Chen had played a dark role in the Tiananmen crackdown). To be sure, in the post-Tiananmen era personal vendettas and naked power struggles likely replaced ideological conflicts as the main cause of conflict among elites. This change may not seem to be much of an improvement. However, the presence of explicit rules for approval of the penalties to officials accused of corruption most likely constrained discretion among most party officials who would have liked to see their rivals sent to prison. It is worth noting that anticorruption investigations were not weaponized on a meaningful scale until after the rise of Xi Jinping. The party established procedures for approving penalties for senior officials found guilty of corruption in 1983. Normally, expulsion from the party had to be blessed by the standing committee of a party organization. So a member of the Central Committee could not be punished without the approval of the PSC.44

相比之下，1992年后激烈的意识形态斗争的结束，极大地增强了后天安门时代的精英阶层的团结。江泽民担任总书记期间，并未进行任何大规模清洗，尽管他偶尔也会开展一些不痛不痒的反腐运动，主要针对中层官员。1995年，只有他的私人对手、政治局委员陈希同因贪污罪入狱（在许多人看来，这是一种“诗意的正义”，因为陈希同在天安门镇压事件中扮演了不光彩的角色）。诚然，在后天安门时代，个人恩怨和赤裸裸的权力斗争很可能取代了意识形态冲突，成为精英阶层内部冲突的主要原因。这种变化或许看起来并不像是进步。然而，对贪污官员的处罚制定了明确的审批规则，这很可能限制了大多数希望将对手送进监狱的党内官员的自由裁量权。值得注意的是，反腐调查直到习近平上台后才被大规模地武器化。中共于1983年制定了对贪污高级官员进行处罚的程序。通常情况下，开除党籍需要得到党组织常务委员会的批准。因此，未经党政委员会批准，中央委员不能受到处罚。

At the highest level of the party, however, what most likely helped curb the weaponization of corruption investigations against political rivals was not merely the presence of such rules but the delicate balance of power in the PSC.45 During the Jiang era, Jiang had to share power with formidable rivals. Li Peng, the hard-line premier (and later chairman of the Standing Committee of the NPC) who occupied the second most senior position in the party, had a strong base of support among conservatives. Qiao Shi, the third-ranked leader until 1997, had enjoyed a more illustrious career than Jiang, having overseen the party's Organization Department and security apparatus. Zhu Rongji, who joined the PSC in 1992 and became premier in 1998, was no pushover, either. In 1993, after poor health and high inflation forced Li Peng, then the premier, to cede much of the executive authority of the State Council to Zhu, the former hard-charging mayor of Shanghai quickly established his credentials as the country's economic czar and served as the most influential economic policymaker in the post-Tiananmen era until his retirement in 2003.

然而，在党的最高层，真正有助于遏制将反腐调查武器化以打击政治对手的，很可能并非仅仅是相关规则的存在，而是国家政协内部微妙的权力平衡。江泽民时代，他不得不与实力强大的对手分享权力。强硬派总理李鹏（后任全国人大常委会委员长）在党内位居第二，拥有强大的保守派支持基础。乔石在1997年之前一直位列第三，他的政治生涯比江泽民更为辉煌，曾掌管党的组织部和安全机构。朱镕基于1992年进入国家政协，1998年成为总理，他也绝非等闲之辈。 1993 年，由于健康状况不佳和通货膨胀严重，时任国务院总理李鹏被迫将国务院的大部分行政权力让渡给朱棣文。这位曾任上海市长、作风强硬的朱棣文迅速确立了自己作为国家经济沙皇的地位，并在后天安门时代担任最有影响力的经济政策制定者，直至 2003 年退休。

In addition to these three political heavyweights, Jiang also had to contend with Li Ruihuan, the fourth-ranked member of the PSC, whom Deng had promoted after the Tiananmen crackdown to counter the hard-liners. Even though they allegedly did not get along, Jiang could do little more than maneuver Li into retirement at the Fifteenth Party Congress in 1997.46 The presence of Hu Jintao, Jiang's successor designated by Deng in 1992, further tied Jiang's hands. The leader-in-waiting could not be counted as a Jiang ally. If anything, Hu had a stake in preserving the balance of power to prevent Jiang from becoming a strongman and threatening his ascension to the top party position after Jiang served out his full second term in 2002.

除了这三位政治重量级人物之外，江泽民还不得不应对国家常委李瑞环。李瑞环是邓小平在天安门事件后提拔的，目的是为了对抗强硬派。尽管两人据称关系不睦，但江泽民也只能在1997年的中共十五大上设法让李瑞环退休。胡锦涛的存在进一步束缚了江泽民的手脚。胡锦涛是邓小平在1992年指定的江泽民接班人。这位未来的领导人不能算是江泽民的盟友。事实上，胡锦涛更希望维持权力平衡，防止江泽民成为强人，从而避免在江泽民2002年第二个任期结束后威胁到他自己接任党的最高领导人。

This analysis suggests that, perhaps more critical than any formal rules, the finely tuned balance of power during the Jiang era (and later in the Hu era) preserved elite stability and collective leadership. Rules are effective only when they can be enforced with coercive power. In the post-Tiananmen era, the appearance of institutionalization and relative stability in elite politics led some to conclude that the party had successfully established binding rules and norms, and politics in the erstwhile Hobbesian world had become “normal.”47 But skeptics questioned whether, in the absence of a third-party enforcer, elites in an autocracy can be counted on to exercise self-restraint and abide by any rules and norms.48 What stands out in the post-Tiananmen era is the total absence of a third party—such as an empowered electorate, an independent judiciary, or a free press—that could enforce party rules and norms. The absence of third-party enforcers was by design rather than by accident. It was Deng’s firm opposition to the political liberalization and to the checks and balances proposed by Zhao in 1987 that blocked the establishment of potential third-party enforcers.

这项分析表明，或许比任何正式规则都更为关键的是，江泽民时代（以及后来的胡锦涛时代）精心调配的权力平衡维护了精英阶层的稳定和集体领导。规则只有在能够通过强制力来执行时才有效。在后天安门时代，精英政治的制度化和相对稳定使一些人得出结论：党已经成功建立了具有约束力的规则和规范，昔日霍布斯式世界的政治已经“正常化”。但怀疑论者质疑，在缺乏第三方强制执行的情况下，专制政体中的精英是否能够自律并遵守任何规则和规范。后天安门时代最显著的特点是完全缺乏能够强制执行党的规则和规范的第三方——例如拥有实权的选民、独立的司法机构或自由的媒体。第三方执法机构的缺失并非偶然，而是有意为之。正是邓小平在1987年对政治自由化和赵立坚提出的权力制衡方案的坚决反对，才阻碍了潜在第三方执法机构的建立。

The fragile balance of power in the post-Tiananmen era enabled the party to adhere to its rules of succession. But a closer look at the two successions, in 2002 and 2012, shows that these two cases were close calls, and they reveal that the institutionalization of elite politics in the post-Tiananmen era was mostly an optical illusion. In the case of Hu's succession in 2002, Jiang most likely resented Deng's appointment of Hu as his successor, but he lacked the power to remove him. Yet Jiang still tried to hang on to power by keeping his position as chairman of the party's Central Military Commission, ostensibly following the precedent set by Deng (who retained the same position after giving up his seat on the PSC in 1987). In Chinese vernacular, Jiang did not retire "naked" (luotui) by giving up all his official titles, as Hu would later do in 2012.

天安门事件后脆弱的权力平衡使得中共得以继续执行其权力交接规则。但仔细分析2002年和2012年的两次权力交接，就会发现这两起事件都险象环生，也揭示了天安门事件后精英政治制度化的表象在很大程度上只是一种假象。以2002年胡锦涛的继任为例，江泽民很可能对邓小平任命胡锦涛为接班人感到不满，但他却无力罢免胡锦涛。然而，江泽民仍然试图通过保留中共中央军事委员会主席的职位来保住权力，表面上是效仿邓小平的做法（邓小平在1987年卸任国家安全委员会委员后仍保留了这一职位）。用通俗的话来说，江泽民并没有像胡锦涛在2012年那样“赤身裸体”（放弃所有官职）地退休。

The shallowness of the party's institutionalization was again on display at its Seventeenth Party Congress in 2007, when Hu's successor was to be selected. Deng's far-sighted, if not preemptive, move to designate Jiang's successor in 1992 may have spared the party a brutal power struggle in 2002, but in 2007 the party was forced to reach agreement on who should succeed Hu. As will be discussed later in this chapter, there were no rules for the party to follow. Xi Jinping—the eventual victor emerging from a contest between Jiang and Hu—was unaffiliated with either faction. But it was this relatively unknown princeling who, after his rise to power in November 2012, wasted little time in purging his political rivals and destroying the fragile balance of power at the top. Xi's success in expanding and perpetuating his personal power reconfirmed that the many rules and norms the party had instituted in the post-Mao era were no match to the political ruthlessness and machinations of a strongman. If anything, the relative tranquility in elite politics during the post-Tiananmen era was the exception that proves the rule of the impossibility of institutionalizing politics in a dictatorship.

2007年，在选择胡锦涛接班人的十七大上，党的制度化程度再次暴露无遗。邓小平在1992年高瞻远瞩地指定江泽民的接班人，或许避免了2002年党内残酷的权力斗争，但到了2007年，党不得不就胡锦涛的接班人达成一致。正如本章稍后将要讨论的，当时党内没有任何规则可循。最终在江泽民和胡锦涛的竞争中胜出的习近平，与这两个派系都没有任何关联。然而，正是这位相对不为人知的“太子党”在2012年11月上台后，迅速清洗了政治对手，破坏了高层脆弱的权力平衡。习近平成功扩大并巩固了个人权力，这再次印证了毛泽东时代之后党内建立的诸多规则和规范，根本无法抵挡强人的政治冷酷无情和权谋手段。如果说有什么例外的话，那就是天安门事件后精英政治的相对平静，恰恰证明了在独裁政权下政治制度化是不可能的。





The Patriotic Education Campaign and the Resurgence of Nationalism





爱国主义教育运动与民族主义的复兴


On June 9, 1989, five days after the PLA crushed the Tiananmen prodemocracy movement, Deng Xiaoping met with senior military officers responsible for the crackdown. As he thanked them for their "hard work," Deng also admitted that "the biggest mistake [we] have made in the last decade was . . . [neglecting] ideological and political education."49 To remedy this mistake, his successors in the 1990s launched a comprehensive campaign to revive nationalism as a means of cultivating mass support for the party. The core component of this campaign was patriotic education—a program utilizing party control of the education system, media, and cultural facilities to instill in the Chinese public, especially the younger generations, national pride, resentment against Western imperialism, and loyalty to the party.

1989年6月9日，解放军镇压天安门民主运动五天后，邓小平会见了负责镇压的高级军官。在感谢他们“辛勤工作”的同时，邓小平也承认“过去十年我们犯的最大错误是……忽视了思想政治教育”。为了弥补这一错误，他的继任者在20世纪90年代发起了一场全面的民族主义复兴运动，以此来培养群众对党的支持。这场运动的核心是爱国主义教育——一项利用党对教育系统、媒体和文化设施的控制，向中国民众，特别是年轻一代灌输民族自豪感、反西方帝国主义情绪和对党的忠诚的计划。

The patriotic education campaign slightly predated Deng's historic southern tour. In late August 1991, prodded by newly installed party general secretary Jiang Zemin, the State Education Commission issued two important documents. One required a strengthening of the history curriculum in primary and middle schools so that pupils would learn more about China's modern and contemporary history. The document explicitly stated that this undertaking aimed to "smash the plot of 'peaceful evolution' by domestic and foreign hostile forces." To ensure that students would have an incentive to study the party's version of history, the document also mandated that starting in 1992, the college entrance examinations, or gaokao, would test knowledge of party history. The second document directed schools and universities to organize visits to museums and revolutionary monuments as part of a program to foster "patriotism and a revolutionary spirit."50

爱国主义教育运动略早于邓小平的历史性南巡。1991年8月下旬，在新任中共中央总书记江泽民的推动下，国家教育委员会发布了两份重要文件。其中一份文件要求加强中小学历史课程，使学生更多地了解中国近代史和当代史。该文件明确指出，此举旨在“粉碎国内外敌对势力‘和平演进’的阴谋”。为了确保学生有动力学习党的历史版本，该文件还规定，从1992年开始，高考将考察学生对党的历史知识。第二份文件指示各中小学和高校组织学生参观博物馆和革命纪念碑，以此作为培养“爱国主义和革命精神”的举措之一。

The most important policy document on patriotic education, "Outline on the Implementation of Patriotic Education," was issued by the CCP Central Propaganda Department in August 1994.51 It laid out the specific provisions for this campaign. Among other things, patriotic education was to focus on Chinese history, China's contributions to civilization, Chinese resistance to foreign aggression and oppression, and CCP policy and accomplishments in economic development. The younger generations were to be the target audience of the patriotic education campaign, and schools were to be the primary venue for this endeavor. Textbooks in primary and middle schools were required to include content on patriotic education. Additionally, films, television, publications, and music would be utilized to disseminate patriotic education. The government would also fund the establishment of "patriotic education bases"—museums, historical monuments, sites of major battles during the civil war, and well-known cultural heritage sites. Patriotic rituals, such as singing the national anthem and flag-raising, would be required at graduation commencement ceremonies and at large sports events. Patriotic education also included promotion of patriotic models—party leaders, artists, poets, and revolutionary martyrs—who had made outstanding contributions to China.

关于爱国主义教育最重要的政策文件是1994年8月由中共中央宣传部发布的《爱国主义教育实施纲要》。该纲要详细阐述了爱国主义教育的具体内容。爱国主义教育的重点包括中国历史、中国对文明的贡献、中国抵抗外国侵略和压迫的历史以及中共在经济发展方面的政策和成就。爱国主义教育的目标群体是青年一代，学校是开展这项活动的主要场所。中小学教科书必须包含爱国主义教育内容。此外，电影、电视、出版物和音乐等也将被用于传播爱国主义教育。政府还将资助建立“爱国主义教育基地”，包括博物馆、历史古迹、内战时期重大战役遗址和著名文化遗产地。爱国主义仪式，例如唱国歌和升国旗，将成为毕业典礼和大型体育赛事上的必要环节。爱国主义教育还包括宣传爱国主义楷模——为中国做出杰出贡献的党的领导人、艺术家、诗人以及革命烈士。

The motivation behind Jiang's push for patriotic education is easy to identify. Politically, he wanted to establish his bona fides as an ideological conservative faithfully implementing Deng's edicts. In the aftermath of the Tiananmen debacle of 1989 and the disintegration of the Soviet Union, cultivating Chinese nationalism also served party interests because it could rally the public behind the party after orthodox Communist ideology had lost its popular appeal.52

江泽民大力推行爱国主义教育的动机不难理解。从政治角度来看，他希望借此确立自己作为忠实执行邓小平思想的保守派意识形态形象。在1989年天安门事件和苏联解体之后，培养民族主义也符合党的利益，因为在正统共产主义意识形态失去民心之后，民族主义能够重新凝聚民众力量，支持党的利益。

Following promulgation of the "Outline" in 1994, the party mobilized its propaganda apparatus and the entire education system to implement patriotic education. Judging from official publications, universities and schools carried out the specific instructions laid out in the "Outline." Curricula were revised to include the required patriotic education content, such as the history of Western imperial aggression and Chinese culture, tradition, and patriotism. Schools began to hold regular flag-raising ceremonies, sing the national anthem at major events, and hang national flags in classrooms, lecture halls, and offices.53 "Patriotic education bases"—newly designated revolutionary monuments, sites of major battles during the second Sino-Japanese war (1937-1945), history museums, and birthplaces of major revolutionary and cultural figures—were established throughout the country. The narratives in the majority of these bases explicitly glorified the role of the CCP in regaining the country's sovereignty, independence, and dignity after a century of national weakness and humiliation.54

1994年《爱国主义纲要》颁布后，党动员宣传机器和整个教育系统开展爱国主义教育。从官方出版物来看，各高校和中小学都严格执行了《纲要》的具体指示。课程进行了修订，纳入了西方帝国主义侵略史、中国文化传统和爱国主义等爱国主义教育内容。学校开始定期举行升旗仪式，在重大活动中奏唱国歌，并在教室、讲堂和办公室悬挂国旗。全国各地还建立了“爱国主义教育基地”，包括新指定的革命纪念碑、抗日战争（1937-1945）重大战役遗址、历史博物馆以及重要革命和文化人物的故居。这些基地中的大多数叙事都明确地歌颂了中国共产党在经历了一个世纪的民族衰弱和屈辱之后，为恢复国家主权、独立和尊严所发挥的作用。

University students were the chief target of patriotic education because the party viewed them as more deeply corrupted by Western ideas and potentially more threatening to CCP rule than any other social groups. Students were required to take two courses: "Theories of Marxism and Leninism" and the "Current Situation and Policy" (xingshi zhengce jiaoyu). Although the campaign was labeled "patriotic education," its primary objective, according to a senior official in the State Education Commission, was to ensure loyalty to Deng's "four cardinal principles" and to the party mission of constructing "socialism with Chinese characteristics under the leadership of the Communist Party."55 Some university officials explicitly stated that the "basic component" of patriotic education was "love for the party and socialism."56

大学生是爱国主义教育的主要目标群体，因为中共认为他们比其他任何社会群体都更容易受到西方思想的腐蚀，对中共统治的潜在威胁也更大。学生必须修读两门课程：“马克思列宁主义理论”和“形势与政策”。尽管这场运动被冠以“爱国主义教育”之名，但据国家教育委员会一位高级官员称，其主要目的是确保学生忠于邓小平的“四项基本原则”以及党的“在党的领导下建设中国特色社会主义”的使命。一些大学官员明确指出，爱国主义教育的“基本组成部分”是“热爱党和社会主义”。

In a major departure from the party's triumphalist tone in promoting Chinese nationalism during the Mao era, the post-Tiananmen leadership opted for a victimhood narrative emphasizing imperial bullying of China and portraying the party as the greatest defender of China's honor.57 The party deliberately picked this theme because, after the Tiananmen crackdown and the Soviet collapse, China was isolated from the West, and it was easy to portray the West as again attempting to subjugate China.

与毛泽东时代党在宣扬中国民族主义时所持的凯旋式口吻截然不同，天安门事件后的领导层选择了一种受害者叙事，强调帝国主义对中国的欺凌，并将党描绘成中国荣誉的最伟大捍卫者。党之所以刻意选择这一主题，是因为在天安门事件和苏联解体后，中国与西方隔绝，很容易将西方描绘成再次试图征服中国。

By coincidence, a series of incidents in the 1990s helped lend credibility to the party's victimhood narrative and reinforce its message that the United States, then the world's sole superpower, was intent on containing China. In 1993 the so-called Yinhe incident enraged the Chinese public. US intelligence agencies accused the Yinhe, a Chinese container ship, of carrying materials to be used in Iran's chemical weapons, and, likely due to American diplomatic intervention, the United Arab Emirates prevented it from docking in its ports. Even after an inspection revealed that the Yinhe was not carrying any contraband, the United States refused to apologize. In 1995, under pressure from Congress, the Clinton administration was forced to grant a visa to Lee Tenghui to visit the United States. Lee was at the time the president of Taiwan, who was reviled in Beijing for his pro-independence aspirations. In response to the pro-independence remarks Lee had made in the United States, China staged a series of military exercises as a warning to Taiwan. But Washington responded in March 1996 by dispatching two carrier battle groups to the waters surrounding Taiwan as China was conducting its largest military exercises thus far, which included the firing of missiles into the waters near Taiwan. Although no military conflict broke out, America's show of support for Taiwan once again angered the Chinese public.58

巧合的是，上世纪90年代发生的一系列事件反而增强了中共的受害者叙事可信度，并强化了其关于美国——当时世界唯一的超级大国——意图遏制中国的论调。1993年，所谓的“银河号事件”激怒了中国民众。美国情报机构指控中国货轮“银河号”载有用于伊朗化学武器的材料，很可能是由于美国的干预，阿联酋阻止了该船停靠其港口。即使检查结果显示“银河号”并未载有任何违禁品，美国仍拒绝道歉。1995年，在国会的压力下，克林顿政府被迫向李登辉发放签证，允许他访问美国。李登辉当时是台湾地区领导人，因其支持台独的倾向而受到北京的强烈谴责。为了回应李登辉在美国发表的台独言论，中国举行了一系列军事演习，以警告台湾。但华盛顿在1996年3月做出回应，派遣两个航母战斗群前往台湾周边海域，当时中国正在进行迄今为止规模最大的军事演习，其中包括向台湾附近海域发射导弹。尽管没有爆发军事冲突，但美国对台湾的支持再次激怒了中国公众。

The event that perhaps did more than anything else to help reinforce the party's narrative of Chinese victimhood is the accidental bombing of the Chinese Embassy in Belgrade by an American stealth fighter during a NATO bombing campaign against Serbia in May 1999. Despite Washington's explanations and apologies, Chinese leaders insisted that this was a deliberate act, and ordinary Chinese took part in nationwide anti-American demonstrations. Angry protestors in Beijing, many of whom were university students, trashed the American Embassy with rocks and other projectiles. In Chengdu, mobs set on fire the residence of the US consul-general.59

或许最能强化中共“中国受害者”叙事的事件，莫过于1999年5月北约轰炸塞尔维亚期间，美国隐形战斗机误炸中国驻贝尔格莱德大使馆。尽管华盛顿方面做出了解释和道歉，中国领导人仍坚称这是一起蓄意行为，普通中国民众也参与了全国范围内的反美示威活动。在北京，愤怒的抗议者（其中许多是大学生）用石块和其他投掷物砸毁了美国大使馆。在成都，暴徒纵火焚烧了美国总领事官邸。

Judging by such a virulent outpouring of anti-Americanism, exactly one decade after prodemocracy students had erected a miniature Statue of Liberty in Tiananmen Square, the party's patriotic education campaign obviously succeeded beyond its own expectations. Indeed, most scholarly research on the rise of Chinese nationalism in the 1990s finds that the attitudes of the Chinese public at the time, in particular the attitudes of the younger generations, became more patriotic and more progovernment.60

从如此强烈的反美情绪来看，就在民主派学生在天安门广场竖起一座微型自由女神像整整十年后，中共的爱国主义教育运动显然取得了超出预期的成功。事实上，大多数关于20世纪90年代中国民族主义兴起的学术研究都发现，当时中国公众，特别是年轻一代的态度变得更加爱国，也更加亲政府。





Selective Repression





选择性抑制


One of the key lessons learned by the party leadership from the Tiananmen crisis was the need for a more effective coercive apparatus. As a result, the party undertook a comprehensive campaign in the 1990s to invest in the state's coercive capacity.61 In April 1990 the party issued a key policy document on strengthening domestic security. Its provisions included restoration of the Central Political and Legal Affairs Commission, a specialized party bureaucracy in charge of law enforcement that had been abolished by reformist party chief Zhao Ziyang in 1988. This resurrected commission was to supervise the strengthening of law enforcement and to coordinate implementation of the party's security agenda. The document vows to wage a merciless struggle against "hostile forces, infiltration, and subversion." It explicitly orders the establishment of urban mobile antiriot forces to quell demonstrations (China had not had specialized antiriot police to deal with the prodemocracy protesters in 1989).62

中共领导层从天安门事件中吸取的重要教训之一是，需要建立更有效的强制机制。因此，中共在20世纪90年代开展了一场全面的运动，旨在提升国家的强制能力。1990年4月，中共发布了一份关于加强国内安全的重要政策文件。该文件规定恢复中央政法委，这是一个负责执法的专门党务机构，曾于1988年被改革派领导人赵紫阳废除。恢复后的政法委负责监督加强执法工作，并协调党的各项安全议程的实施。该文件誓言要对“敌对势力、渗透和颠覆”进行无情的斗争。它明确命令建立城市机动防暴部队来镇压示威活动（1989年中国没有专门的防暴警察来应对民主抗议者）。

Ten months after the issuance of this document, the party released a second directive on domestic security, "Decision on Strengthening Comprehensive Management of Public Security." On paper, this document appears to emphasize law and order as well as social stability, but it also includes provisions for tightening social control, such as monitoring the "floating population" (people without fixed household registrations) and surveillance of dance halls, printed materials, and venues for showing videos. It calls on local governments to increase funding for law enforcement.63

在该文件发布十个月后，党发布了第二份关于国内安全的指令——《关于加强公安综合管理的决定》。这份文件表面上强调维护法律秩序和社会稳定，但同时也包含加强社会管控的条款，例如对“流动人口”（无固定户籍的人）进行监控，以及对舞厅、印刷品和视频播放场所进行监视。文件还要求地方政府增加执法经费。

Investment in China's coercive apparatus—police, courts, and procuratorates—rose dramatically in the years after these documents were issued. From 1991 to 1995 the amount spent on these three branches of the state rose threefold in absolute terms (from 10 billion yuan in 1991 to 30 billion yuan in 1995). By 2002, a decade after Deng's southern tour, spending on these three branches would rise to 110 billion yuan, ten times the amount in 1991 (unadjusted for inflation).64

这些文件颁布后的几年里，对中国强制机构——警察、法院和检察机关——的投资大幅增长。1991年至1995年，这三个国家部门的支出绝对值增长了三倍（从1991年的100亿元人民币增至1995年的300亿元人民币）。到2002年，即邓小平南巡十年后，这三个部门的支出将达到1100亿元人民币，是1991年的十倍（未经通货膨胀调整）。

The size of the police force more than doubled from 1989 to 2010 (from 769,000 to at least 2 million).65 Starting in the early 2000s, the party expanded the police units responsible for domestic surveillance and political repression ("domestic security protection"), adding probably more than ten thousand police devoted solely to dealing with political dissidents, underground religious believers, and cult members.66 In mid-1990 the People's Armed Police (PAP) began to form specialized antiriot units. By the end of the 1990s, most local police departments had established similar units.67

从1989年到2010年，警察部队规模增加了一倍多（从76.9万人增至至少200万人）。从21世纪初开始，党扩大了负责国内监视和政治镇压的警察部队（“国内安全保护”），可能增加了超过一万名专门负责处理政治异见人士、地下宗教信徒和邪教成员的警察。1990年代中期，人民武警开始组建专门的防暴部队。到1990年代末，大多数地方警察部门都建立了类似的部队。

In the 1990s the party launched a series of initiatives to upgrade the capabilities of the surveillance state. In November 1991 the powerful Ministry of Public Security (MPS) issued new rules on surveillance of "key populations" (such as dissidents, activists in underground religious groups, and ex-convicts). In December 1991 the ministry established covert operations on university campuses. In May 1992 it directed local police to increase manpower to target Western "infiltration," underground Catholic groups, and cults. At the direction of the party, police intensified internet surveillance in July 1997, and in October 1997 it tightened control over foreign funding of Chinese social science research organizations.68 The decade saw a major expansion of the network of informants recruited by the police to act as the "eyes and ears" of law enforcement. For example, the number of "special intelligence personnel" (informers) employed by police in Shaanxi province nearly doubled between 1988 and 2001.69

上世纪90年代，中共推出了一系列举措，旨在提升监控国家的能力。1991年11月，权力强大的公安部颁布了针对“重点人群”（如异见人士、地下宗教团体活动人士和刑满释放人员）的监控新规。1991年12月，公安部在大学校园内开展了秘密行动。1992年5月，公安部指示地方警察增加警力，以打击西方“渗透”、地下天主教团体和邪教组织。在中共的指示下，警方于1997年7月加强了对互联网的监控，并于1997年10月收紧了对中国社会科学研究机构接受外国资助的控制。这十年间，警方招募的线人网络大幅扩张，这些线人充当了执法部门的“耳目”。例如，1988年至2001年间，陕西省警方雇佣的“特殊情报人员”（线人）人数几乎翻了一番。

The 1990s also saw the beginning of a well-funded program to upgrade the technological capabilities of the coercive capacity of the party-state. In November 1991 the MPS convened a national conference on the modernization of law enforcement technology, marking the beginning of a drive to upgrade law enforcement with advanced surveillance technology.70 In 1998 the party formally approved the Golden Shield Project (the IT modernization program of the MPS that includes the "Great Firewall of China").71

20世纪90年代，一项旨在提升党国强制能力技术水平的专项资金计划也开始实施。1991年11月，公安部召开全国执法技术现代化会议，标志着以先进监控技术升级执法工作的开端。1998年，党正式批准了“金盾工程”（公安部信息技术现代化项目，其中包括“防火长城”）。

In addition to its sustained and massive investment in coercive capacity, during the Jiang era the party constantly refined its tactics of repression, often deploying methods used in soft-authoritarian regimes in other East Asian countries.72 Inviting known dissidents to "tea" as a subtle form of intimidation became a routine tactic, as was the use of family relatives and friends to engage in emotional blackmail against ordinary citizens who participated in peaceful petitioning. When brutal force was needed, local authorities would hire thugs to beat up the protesters. Aware that major public holidays, key anniversaries (such as the anniversary of the June 4 massacre), or visits by foreign dignitaries could become rallying points for collective protests, police would tighten security measures on those sensitive dates to prevent such disturbances from occurring.73

除了持续大规模地投入强制力之外，江泽民时代，中共不断完善其镇压策略，经常借鉴其他东亚国家温和威权政权的手段。邀请已知的异见人士“喝茶”作为一种隐晦的恐吓手段成为常规做法，利用亲友对参与和平请愿的普通民众进行情感勒索也成为惯例。必要时，地方当局会雇佣暴徒殴打示威者。警方意识到重大公共假日、重要纪念日（例如六四事件周年纪念日）或外国政要访问都可能成为集体抗议的集结点，因此会在这些敏感日期加强安保措施，以防止此类骚乱发生。

The regime became more selective in picking its targets. It prosecuted and jailed fewer dissidents, often preferring to charge dissidents with nonpolitical crimes (such as disturbing public order) instead of "subverting state power." To decapitate political opposition at home and to placate Western governments, which the post-1989 regime sought to woo in order to maintain access to capital, technology, and markets, the party forced into exile nearly all the best-known dissidents, such as Wei Jingsheng (the symbol of the Democracy Wall Movement in 1978–1979) and Wang Dan and Wang Juntao (leaders of the Tiananmen protests in 1989).74

该政权在选择打击目标时变得更加有选择性。它减少了对异议人士的起诉和监禁，往往更倾向于以非政治罪名（例如扰乱公共秩序）而非“颠覆国家政权”来指控异议人士。为了在国内铲除政治反对派，并安抚西方政府（1989年后的政权试图拉拢西方国家以维持其获取资本、技术和市场的渠道），该党迫使几乎所有最知名的异议人士流亡海外，例如魏京生（1978-1979年民主墙运动的象征人物）以及王丹和王军涛（1989年天安门抗议活动的领导人）。

Several key factors motivated the post-Tiananmen regime to massively increase investment in its coercive capacity but at the same time also to adopt more refined tactics of repression. Due to the party's near-death experience during the Tiananmen crisis, it came to appreciate that its coercive capacity was the ultimate guarantor of regime survival and that prevention of a similar crisis was far preferable to a brutal crackdown. The rapid growth of fiscal revenue during the booming 1990s also enabled the state to channel more resources into law enforcement and surveillance. The switch to soft-authoritarian tactics of repression allowed the party to target fewer political threats more effectively and to leave most of the population unaffected. Politically, selective repression served the party well. Most ordinary people enjoyed continual expansion of their personal freedoms as the economy thrived. This was translated into mass support for the regime. Geopolitically, soft-authoritarian repression helped reduce tensions between China and its key trading partners in the West, justifying that engagement with China offered tangible evidence that economic liberalization might lead to a political opening in the future.

天安门事件后，促使中共政权大幅提升其强制力，同时采取更为精细的镇压策略，是多种关键因素共同作用的结果。由于天安门事件中中共的生死存亡，它认识到强制力是政权生存的最终保障，预防类似危机远比残酷镇压更为可取。20世纪90年代经济繁荣时期财政收入的快速增长，也使得国家能够将更多资源投入执法和监控。转向温和的威权镇压策略，使得中共能够更有效地打击少数政治威胁，同时又不至于影响到大多数民众。在政治上，选择性镇压对中共十分有利。随着经济的繁荣发展，大多数普通民众的个人自由不断扩大，这转化为对政权的广泛支持。从地缘政治角度来看，温和的威权镇压有助于缓解中国与其西方主要贸易伙伴之间的紧张关系，证明与中国的接触提供了切实的证据，表明经济自由化可能会在未来带来政治开放。

Despite adoption of more refined tactics of repression, the essential bureaucratic organizations of totalitarianism and the mechanisms of deploying them for mass terror remained intact. The party could quickly mobilize these organizations when confronted with a direct and forceful challenge to its authority, as in the case of the protests staged by the Falungong spiritual group in 1999. After the party leadership issued an order banning this group, which allegedly had tens of millions nationwide followers, Chinese police resorted to extremely brutal methods to arrest, imprison, and torture its leaders and followers, effectively destroying the group as an organized force within only a few years.75

尽管采取了更为精细的镇压策略，但极权主义的基本官僚机构及其用于大规模恐怖活动的机制依然完好无损。当面临对其权威的直接而强烈的挑战时，例如1999年法轮功精神团体发起的抗议活动，党可以迅速动员这些机构。据称，法轮功在全国拥有数千万信徒，在党的领导层下令取缔该团体后，中国警方采取了极其残酷的手段逮捕、监禁和酷刑折磨其领导人和追随者，在短短几年内有效地摧毁了该团体的组织力量。

The near-total destruction of Falungong foreshadowed the return of totalitarian rule under Xi Jinping more than a decade later.

法轮宫的近乎彻底的毁灭预示着十多年后习近平领导下的极权统治的回归。





Co-optation of Social Elites





对社会精英的收买


A distinct feature of the post-1989 neo-authoritarian order is the successful effort by the party to expand its social base beyond workers and peasants, the two groups that made up the majority of party members but that had lost huge economic ground and political influence during the post-Mao era. In 1978, on the eve of Deng's reform, peasants constituted 47 percent of party members, while workers accounted for nearly 19 percent. Only 1.6 percent of the 37 million party members were classified as "professionals, cadres, and students."76 The majority of party members were poorly educated. In 1980, 11 percent of party members were illiterate, 45 percent had only a primary-school education, and a mere 3 percent had received a college-level education.77 As the party pivoted to a survival strategy centered on economic development, it needed to recruit individuals with better educational and professional qualifications. Beyond the requirement for expertise that would be useful in managing a complex economy, the party's strategy was to co-opt the very social elites whom it had viewed as enemies or threats during the Maoist era. This tactic also contained a Machiavellian element: preempting elite-based opposition in Chinese society. Exclusion of elites with a higher social status and more economic resources could antagonize and even turn such social elites into opponents of the regime. Because repression of the intelligentsia and private entrepreneurs could endanger the party's economic agenda, it therefore was no longer attractive, and co-optation became a preferred option.

1989年后新威权秩序的一个显著特征是，党成功地将其社会基础扩展到工人和农民之外。工人和农民这两个群体虽然构成了党员的大多数，但在后毛泽东时代失去了巨大的经济地位和政治影响力。1978年，在邓小平改革前夕，农民占党员总数的47%，工人占近19%。在3700万党员中，只有1.6%被归类为“专业人才、干部和学生”。大多数党员的教育水平较低。1980年，11%的党员是文盲，45%的党员只有小学学历，仅有3%的党员接受过大学教育。随着党转向以经济发展为中心的生存战略，它需要招募具有更高教育和专业素质的人才。除了需要具备管理复杂经济所需的专业知识外，党的策略还在于拉拢那些在毛泽东时代被视为敌人或威胁的社会精英。这一策略也包含着马基雅维利式的成分：先发制人，扼杀中国社会中精英阶层的反对。排斥那些拥有较高社会地位和较多经济资源的精英，可能会激怒他们，甚至使他们成为政权的反对者。由于镇压知识分子和私营企业家可能会危及党的经济议程，因此这种做法不再具有吸引力，拉拢精英便成为更优的选择。

The broad outline of the party's strategy of co-opting social elites was laid out in a September 1994 Central Committee decision on party building. Among the top priorities identified by the party were the appointment and promotion of a large number of loyal and talented young officials and recruitment of "outstanding elements" among young people and women.78 Initially, the focus of the co-optation strategy was the recruitment and promotion of well-educated individuals, in particular university students, a group the party had a strong incentive to win over given its role in leading the prodemocracy movements in the 1980s.79 (The party issued a specific directive in 2005 on strengthening recruitment of university students.)80 For example, the share of party members among undergraduates at prestigious Tsinghua University doubled from 8.3 percent to 16.5 percent between 1995 and 2005 (the share would rise to 29 percent in 2011).81 As the party controlled access to career opportunities, it had no difficulty luring talented and ambitious university students to join its ranks.82

1994 年 9 月，中央委员会就党的建设问题作出了决定，概述了党拉拢社会精英的战略纲要。该党确定的首要任务之一是任命和提拔大量忠诚且有才华的青年官员，以及招募青年和妇女中的“优秀人才”。78 最初，拉拢策略的重点是招募和提拔受过良好教育的人员，特别是大学生。鉴于该党在20世纪80年代领导民主运动的作用，它有强烈的动机争取大学生的支持。79 （该党在2005年发布了一项关于加强招募大学生的专项指示。）80 例如，在著名的清华大学，本科生中党员的比例从1995年的8.3%翻了一番，达到2005年的16.5%（到2011年，这一比例将上升到29%）。81 由于该党控制着职业机会，因此它很容易吸引有才华且有抱负的大学生加入其政党。排名.82

The drive to recruit well-educated individuals made rapid progress in the 1990s, and toward the end of the post-Tiananmen era it had dramatically transformed the composition of the party. In 1990 only 10.3 percent of party members had received a college-level education or higher. A decade later, 21 percent of party members had a college-level education or higher.83 By 2000 the party would be unrecognizable to its founders. Of the 64.5 million members, workers and peasants accounted for about 44 percent (compared with 66 percent in 1979). The share of professionals had risen to 19 percent (from 1.6 percent in 1978).84 The share of workers and peasants in the party would continue to fall as the party recruited more college graduates and professionals. In 2011 workers and peasants made up 39 percent of party members, while managers (excluding full-time party and government officials), professionals, and college students accounted for 27 percent. Close to 40 percent of party members had a college-level education or higher.85

20世纪90年代，招募高学历人才的行动取得了快速进展，到后天安门时代末期，这一行动已彻底改变了党的构成。1990年，仅有10.3%的党员拥有大学或以上学历。十年后，这一比例上升至21%。到2000年，党的面貌已与创始人所设想的截然不同。在6450万党员中，工人和农民约占44%（1979年为66%）。专业人士的比例上升至19%（1978年为1.6%）。随着党招募更多大学毕业生和专业人士，工人和农民在党内的比例将继续下降。 2011年，工人和农民占党员总数的39%，管理人员（不包括专职党政干部）、专业人士和大学生占27%。近40%的党员拥有大专及以上学历。

After the party's efforts to co-opt the well-educated yielded impressive results, it shifted its attention to private entrepreneurs who had gained social status and enormous resources during the booming 1990s. The milestone was Jiang Zemin's theory of the "Three Represents," unveiled with great fanfare on July 1, 2001, the eightieth anniversary of the founding of the party.86 Ostensibly, Jiang was trying to advance a new ideological theory spelling out what the party stood for (or represented) to replace the party's orthodox ideological doctrine that had emphasized revolution and struggle against capitalism. Ideologically, the "Three Represents" implicitly endorsed capitalism, which Jiang euphemistically but awkwardly termed "advanced social productive forces." In practice, this framing opened the door for the party to admit as members private entrepreneurs—the very exploiting class whose destruction theoretically is the goal of orthodox communism.

在党拉拢受过良好教育的人群取得显著成效后，它将注意力转向了在20世纪90年代经济繁荣时期获得社会地位和巨额资源的私营企业家。一个里程碑式的事件是江泽民提出的“三个代表”理论，该理论于2001年7月1日，即党建党八十周年之际，高调发布。表面上看，江泽民试图推进一种新的意识形态理论，阐明党的立场（或代表），以取代党以往强调革命和反资本主义斗争的正统意识形态。从意识形态上看，“三个代表”实际上认可了资本主义，江泽民委婉但笨拙地将其称为“先进的社会生产力”。实际上，这种框架为党接纳私营企业家——这个剥削阶级，而理论上，消灭他们是正统共产主义的目标——打开了大门。

Even though Jiang's "Three Represents," which the party enshrined in its charter in November 2002 as "important thought," do not appear to have done much to rejuvenate the party ideologically, the green light to recruit capitalists quickly had a notable impact on co-opting a new social group that was in control of a growing portion of the national economy. By 2000, private firms (excluding micro household businesses) employed over 24 million workers.87 Obviously, the party was eager to gain the support of this group of social elites.

尽管江泽民的“三个代表”（该思想于2002年11月被写入党章，并被奉为“重要思想”）似乎并未在意识形态上对党产生多大影响，但迅速允许招募资本家却对拉拢一个掌控着国民经济日益增长份额的新兴社会群体产生了显著影响。到2000年，私营企业（不包括微型家庭企业）雇佣了超过2400万名员工。显然，党渴望获得这群社会精英的支持。

Based on surveys conducted in the early 2000s of owners of private firms, in 1999 only 18 percent of them were party members.88

根据2000年代初对私营企业所有者进行的调查，1999年只有18%的私营企业所有者是党员。

Following Jiang's call to admit capitalists into the party, the share of private entrepreneurs who were party members rose rapidly. Survey results show that in 2002 that share had risen to 30 percent, compared with only 20 percent in 2000.89 Toward the end of the 2000s, the party was recruiting about 80,000 "managers and technical personnel" of private firms each year.90 To be sure, private entrepreneurs had mixed motives for joining the party. Many, if not most, sought the political status that came with party membership as a layer of protection of their wealth, or they believed that they could have more access to opportunities via membership. Additionally, having this new social group inside the party was, on the whole, a successful move to shore up support for the party in the rapidly changing society.91

在江泽民号召接纳资本家入党后，私营企业家的党员比例迅速上升。调查结果显示，2002年这一比例上升至30%，而2000年仅为20%。到2000年代末，党每年从私营企业招募约8万名“管理人员和技术人员”。当然，私营企业家入党的动机不一。许多人，甚至大多数人，寻求党员身份带来的政治地位，以此作为对其财富的保护，或者他们认为通过党员身份可以获得更多机会。此外，将这一新的社会群体纳入党内，总体而言，是巩固党在快速变化的社会中支持率的成功举措。

Party membership was not the only enticement used to co-opt social elites. In the post-Tiananmen era, a select group of eminent intellectuals, professionals, and private entrepreneurs were picked to be delegates to the local people's congresses and the people's political consultative conferences. The inclusion of these successful and well-known individuals conveyed the impression to the public that the party enjoyed their support.92

党员身份并非拉拢社会精英的唯一手段。在后天安门时代，一批杰出的知识分子、专业人士和私营企业家被选为地方人民代表大会和人民政治协商会议的代表。这些成功人士和知名人士的加入，向公众传递了党得到他们支持的印象。





False Dawn: The Limits of Neo-Authoritarianism





虚假的黎明：新威权主义的局限性


As illustrated, within a decade of Deng's southern tour in 1992, the collective leadership under Jiang Zemin had successfully transformed Deng's neo-authoritarian vision into a comprehensive strategy of regime survival. Its key pillars consisted of performance legitimacy, collective leadership underpinned by a fragile balance of power, expansion of popular support through the cultivation of Chinese nationalism, selective repression, and co-optation of social elites. By and large, the party showed a remarkable degree of adaptation in the 1990s, and its new strategy served it well.

如图所示，在邓小平1992年南巡后的十年内，江泽民领导下的集体领导成功地将邓小平的新威权主义构想转化为一套全面的政权生存战略。其关键支柱包括：政绩合法性、以脆弱的权力平衡为基础的集体领导、通过培育中国民族主义扩大民众支持、选择性镇压以及拉拢社会精英。总的来说，中共在20世纪90年代展现出了惊人的适应能力，其新战略也取得了成功。

Ideologically, the party was far more homogenous than perhaps at any time in its history. The purge after the Tiananmen crackdown eliminated the liberals at the top of the leadership. Ever fearful of elevating China's equivalent of a Gorbachev to the top, the party, dominated by conservative technocrats, denied power to those with liberal leanings. At the same time, ultra-conservatives who resisted the market reforms were sidelined as well because their ideological orthodoxy was incompatible with the party's conviction that its survival depended on performance legitimacy, which could be delivered by business-friendly policies. In terms of elite politics, ideological homogeneity was translated into relative elite stability. In contrast to the 1980s, the Jiang era—as well as the Hu Jintao era—stands out mainly because of the absence of bitter ideological clashes such as those that ended with the purge of Hu Yaobang, Zhao Ziyang, and their close associates. To be sure, conflicts among senior leaders existed, but they were over personality and power, not ideology. More important, such conflicts were contained, as evidenced by the fact that during the Jiang era, only one Politburo member was jailed on charges of corruption.

从意识形态上看，中共的同质性或许比其历史上任何时期都要高。天安门事件后的清洗清除了领导层中的自由派人士。由于始终担心会出现类似戈尔巴乔夫的人物，由保守派技术官僚主导的中共，因此拒绝给予倾向自由主义的人士权力。与此同时，那些抵制市场改革的极端保守派也被边缘化，因为他们的意识形态正统性与中共的信念相悖，即中共的生存取决于政绩合法性，而这种合法性可以通过亲商政策来实现。在精英政治层面，意识形态的同质性转化为相对的精英稳定。与20世纪80年代相比，江泽民时代——以及胡锦涛时代——之所以引人注目，主要是因为没有发生像胡耀邦、赵紫阳及其亲信被清洗那样激烈的意识形态冲突。诚然，高层领导人之间确实存在冲突，但这些冲突是围绕个人恩怨和权力展开的，而非意识形态之争。更重要的是，这些冲突得到了有效控制，江泽民时期仅有一名政治局委员因贪污罪入狱便证明了这一点。

The timing of the party's pivot to neo-authoritarian rule in the 1990s could not have been more fortuitous. Economically, the reforms in the 1980s had built the foundations of a market economy—privatization of agriculture, a fast-growing private sector, and linkages with the global economy. The massive rural-urban migration coupled with the young population (nearly 90 percent of the population was under the age of 59 in 1990) became a sustained and powerful driver of growth during the subsequent two decades.93 Despite a few episodes of tensions between the United States and China, the external environment was relatively benign. Instead of efforts by Washington to contain China after the end of the Cold War, as Beijing feared, the United States promoted globalization as an instrument to integrate China into the global economy, thus giving China unprecedented access to Western markets, capital, and technology.

上世纪90年代，中共转向新威权统治的时机可谓恰到好处。经济方面，80年代的改革奠定了市场经济的基础——农业私有化、快速发展的私营部门以及与全球经济的联系。大规模的农村人口向城市迁移，加上年轻人口众多（1990年近90%的人口年龄在59岁以下），成为随后二十年经济增长的持续强劲动力。尽管中美之间偶尔出现紧张关系，但外部环境相对友好。冷战结束后，华盛顿并没有像北京所担心的那样试图遏制中国，而是将全球化作为将中国融入全球经济的工具，从而使中国以前所未有的方式进入西方市场，获得西方资本和技术。

The tools deployed by the party to guard against domestic threats to its power proved surprisingly effective. The nationalism cultivated by the party generated a new source of mass support. Co-optation of social elites broadened the party's base and improved the educational and professional qualifications of party officials. More sophisticated tactics of political repression enabled the party to contain emerging threats to its power. In the 1990s surveillance, intimidation, imprisonment, and exile neutralized the prodemocracy movement as a serious danger, and the party's investment in a coercive apparatus paid off handsomely, as shown by the suppression of ethnic minority unrest in Tibet and Xinjiang, the banning of Falungong, and the suppression of worker unrest in the aftermath of the mass layoffs by bankrupt SOEs at the end of the decade.94

党为防范国内对其政权的威胁而采取的手段出人意料地有效。党所培育的民族主义催生了新的群众支持来源。对社会精英的拉拢扩大了党的群众基础，并提高了党内官员的教育和专业素质。更为老练的政治镇压策略使党能够遏制对其政权的新兴威胁。在20世纪90年代，监视、恐吓、监禁和流放有效地消除了民主运动的严重威胁，党对强制机器的投入获得了丰厚的回报，例如镇压西藏和新疆的少数民族动乱、取缔法轮功以及在90年代末国有企业破产大规模裁员后镇压工人的抗议活动。

However, the neo-authoritarian order constructed in the 1990s under Jiang Zemin's leadership had inherent flaws, which would become both more visible and more serious during the Hu era. Elite security was ensured not by rules and norms enforceable by a third party but by a fragile balance of power among rivals. Senior leaders with their respective extensive power bases in the party-state prevented the two party chiefs, Jiang and Hu, from turning collective leadership into strongman rule, as Xi Jinping was able to do shortly after his rise in late 2012. Without durable institutional constraints, which are difficult to establish and preserve even in democracies, elite security was certain to vanish once the underlying balance of power ceased to exist.

然而，江泽民领导下于上世纪90年代构建的新威权秩序存在固有缺陷，这些缺陷在胡锦涛时代变得更加明显和严重。精英阶层的安全并非依靠第三方强制执行的规则和规范来保障，而是依靠竞争对手之间脆弱的权力平衡。党国内部拥有广泛权力基础的高级领导人阻止了江泽民和胡锦涛两位领导人将集体领导转变为强人统治，而习近平在2012年底上台后不久便做到了这一点。缺乏持久的制度约束（即使在民主国家，建立和维护持久的制度约束也并非易事），一旦潜在的权力平衡不复存在，精英阶层的安全必然会消失。

In addition, the post-Tiananmen neo-authoritarian order was fundamentally incompatible with genuine political liberalization, democratization, and rule of law, thus diminishing the possibility that economic development under one-party rule could result in a transition to democracy. The reforms championed by liberals and moderates in the party laid the foundation for a modern legal system. Landmark legislation such as the Criminal Procedure Law (1980), Economic Contract Law (1981), Foreign Company Law (1986), and Administrative Litigation Law (1989) were all passed in the 1980s. Despite their flaws, they marked a promising first step toward rule of law. Even with the booming economy, however, the progress in legal reform in the 1990s was mixed at best. The NPC enacted many more laws than it did in the 1980s, and judges and lawyers were also better educated and trained. But the party steadfastly resisted any reforms that would make the judiciary more independent, and it frequently ignored or even violated the laws passed by the NPC. Consequently, by the end of the Jiang era, China's legal system remained firmly under the control of the party despite its ostensible modern appearance of robed judges presiding over proceedings in newly built courtrooms.95

此外，天安门事件后的新威权秩序与真正的政治自由化、民主化和法治从根本上来说是不相容的，从而降低了一党专政下的经济发展最终实现民主转型的可能性。党内自由派和温和派倡导的改革为现代法律体系奠定了基础。20世纪80年代通过了一系列具有里程碑意义的立法，例如《刑事诉讼法》（1980年）、《经济合同法》（1981年）、《外国公司法》（1986年）和《行政诉讼法》（1989年）。尽管这些法律存在缺陷，但它们标志着迈向法治的良好开端。然而，即便在经济蓬勃发展的时期，20世纪90年代的法律改革进展也只能说是喜忧参半。全国人大颁布的法律数量远超20世纪80年代，法官和律师的教育和培训水平也得到了提高。但中共坚决抵制任何旨在增强司法独立的改革，并经常无视甚至违反全国人大通过的法律。因此，到江泽民时代末期，尽管表面上出现了身着法袍的法官在新建成的法庭里主持审理案件的现代化景象，但中国的司法体系仍然牢牢掌握在中共手中。

Substantive progress in developing a basic system of accountability was also minimal. With the support of the party, the NPC enacted an interim law permitting rural residents to elect "village committees" and their directors in 1987. Even though the "village committees" were civic organizations and thus lacked formal political authority or power, this move was initially hailed as another tentative step in the direction of grassroots democracy. By the 1990s, however, this route had turned out to be a dead end. The party allowed such elections throughout rural China, but it refused to take the next step of permitting competitive elections for township governments. (Townships constitute the lowest administrative units in the Chinese state.) Eventually, this experimental effort to build grassroots democracy in rural China fizzled out.96

在建立基本问责制度方面，实质性进展也微乎其微。在党的支持下，全国人大于1987年颁布了一项临时法律，允许农村居民选举“村委会”及其主任。尽管“村委会”是公民组织，缺乏正式的政治权威或权力，但此举最初被誉为朝着基层民主迈出的又一步。然而，到了20世纪90年代，这条路却走到了尽头。党允许在中国农村地区进行此类选举，但却拒绝采取下一步行动，允许乡镇政府进行竞争性选举。（乡镇是中国国家最低的行政单位。）最终，这项在中国农村建立基层民主的实验性尝试以失败告终。

Without rule of law and accountability enforced by a civil society or a free press, economic development under autocratic rule inevitably breeds systemic corruption. Although corruption in the 1990s appeared to be less rampant than it would be in the 2000s, the decade saw several major cases of corruption that were unprecedented in terms of the number of people and the amount of bribes involved.97 In the infamous Xiamen smuggling scandal, anticorruption investigators found that a criminal group had managed to smuggle into China more than 53 billion yuan worth of goods between 1996 and 1999 with the help of dozens of government officials, including a vice minister of public security and other senior officials in Fujian's police and customs systems.98

在缺乏公民社会或新闻自由保障的法治和问责制的情况下，专制统治下的经济发展必然滋生系统性腐败。尽管20世纪90年代的腐败现象似乎不如21世纪初那样猖獗，但那十年间也出现了几起前所未有的重大腐败案件，涉及人数之多、贿赂金额之巨，都堪称史无前例。在臭名昭著的厦门走私案中，反腐调查人员发现，一个犯罪团伙在数十名政府官员的协助下，包括一名公安部副部长以及福建省公安和海关系统的其他高级官员，于1996年至1999年间走私了价值超过530亿元人民币的货物进入中国。

Toward the end of the 1990s, cracks began to appear in the party's survival strategy that had centered on economic performance, as evidenced by the rising social unrest.99 Among the drivers linked to the social unrest were the brutal enforcement of the party's "one-child policy," regressive tax-collection policies, illegal evictions in urban areas, seizure of the farmers' land by local officials, factory closures, and unpaid wages.100 Even though most social protests were small, isolated, and short-lived, this growing trend not only dented the party's image of competence but also indicated that the pro-growth policies pursued by the post-Tiananmen regime were harming a significant portion of the Chinese population, and the regime would likely lose support if inequality, corruption, and abuses of the rights of ordinary people continued to fuel popular resentment.

20世纪90年代末，随着社会动荡的加剧，党的生存战略开始出现裂痕，而该战略的核心在于经济发展。99 导致社会动荡的原因包括：党的“独生子女政策”的残酷执行、倒退的税收政策、城市地区的非法拆迁、地方官员没收农民土地、工厂倒闭以及拖欠工资。100 尽管大多数社会抗议规模较小、零星分散且持续时间短暂，但这种日益增长的趋势不仅损害了党的执政形象，也表明后天安门时代政权推行的促增长政策正在损害相当一部分中国民众的利益。如果不平等、腐败和侵犯普通民众权利等问题继续加剧民众的不满，政权很可能会失去支持。

Ultimately, economic reform pursued by a neo-authoritarian regime is likely to fall into the trap of a "partial reform equilibrium." In a transition from a planned economy to a market economy, reform tends to stall after some initial efforts have been completed but more critical measures have yet to be undertaken.101 At the midpoint in the transition process, regimes initiating a transition will lose incentives to go all the way because, although partial reforms improve economic efficiency and bolster party legitimacy, any further reforms are certain to weaken the regime's control over the economy and undermine its power.102 To be sure, the full symptoms of this "trapped transition" were not yet plainly visible, at least in the economic realm, until Hu Jintao came to power in 2002, but the political logic behind a "trapped transition" was firmly embedded in the very neo-authoritarian vision that Deng bequeathed to Jiang in 1992.

最终，新威权政权推行的经济改革很可能陷入“部分改革均衡”的陷阱。在从计划经济向市场经济转型的过程中，改革往往会在一些初步努力完成后停滞不前，因为更关键的措施尚未实施。在转型过程的中期，发起转型的政权会失去彻底改革的动力，因为尽管部分改革可以提高经济效率并增强党的合法性，但任何进一步的改革都必然会削弱政权对经济的控制，并损害其权力。诚然，这种“转型困境”的全部症状，至少在经济领域，直到胡锦涛2002年上台后才逐渐显现，但其背后的政治逻辑却牢牢地根植于邓小平1992年留给江泽民的新威权主义理念之中。





4 Stagnation in the Hu Jintao Era





4 胡锦涛时代的停滞


DENG XIAOPING, who had doggedly pursued his neo-authoritarian vision in the 1980s, almost certainly believed that this political order would have more staying power than orthodox communism. His immediate successor, Jiang Zemin, who had translated Deng's rather abstract vision into actual party policies in the 1990s with great success, also likely thought the post-Tiananmen order could endure. It is true that, in the wake of the Tiananmen crisis and the collapse of the Soviet Union, the party's decision to embrace capitalism with no ideological reservations in order to save its rule was wiser than the only other alternative of returning to the orthodox communist system of the early 1950s. But Deng, Jiang, and other post-Tiananmen party leaders overlooked the most serious flaws of neo-authoritarian developmentalism: the gradual but inevitable loss of momentum of economic reform and corruption-induced regime decay. If anything, the post-Tiananmen neo-authoritarian order turned out to be more fragile and less durable than its architects had thought. When Hu Jintao succeeded Jiang in late 2002, signs of pathologies of neo-authoritarian developmentalism such as rampant official corruption, rising socioeconomic inequality, deteriorating governance, and growing social unrest had become inescapable. By the time Hu left office in November 2012, the rot inside the regime was so advanced that Xi Jinping, who succeeded Hu, was able to dismantle it with relative ease.

邓小平在20世纪80年代执着地推行其新威权主义理念，他几乎肯定认为这种政治秩序比正统共产主义更具持久性。他的直接继任者江泽民在20世纪90年代成功地将邓小平较为抽象的理念转化为实际的党内政策，他很可能也认为后天安门时代的秩序能够长久维持。诚然，在天安门事件和苏联解体之后，为了保住政权，党决定毫无意识形态保留地拥抱资本主义，这比回归20世纪50年代初的正统共产主义体制这一唯一选择更为明智。但是，邓小平、江泽民和其他后天安门时代的党内领导人忽视了新威权发展主义最严重的缺陷：经济改革势头逐渐但不可避免的减弱以及腐败导致的政权衰败。如果说有什么不同的话，那就是后天安门时代的威权新秩序比其缔造者预想的更加脆弱、更加不持久。2002年底胡锦涛接替江泽民时，新威权发展主义的弊病，例如官僚腐败猖獗、社会经济不平等加剧、治理能力下降以及社会动荡日益加剧，已经显而易见。到2012年11月胡锦涛卸任时，政权内部的腐败已经根深蒂固，以至于接替他的习近平能够相对轻松地将其瓦解。

On the surface, however, the post-Tiananmen order persisted without much change during the decade when Hu Jintao served as the party chief, 2002-2012. The Chinese economy sustained its rapid ascent mainly because China's entry into the World Trade Organization (WTO) at the end of 2001 generated a boom in foreign direct investment and trade, while urbanization continued to funnel tens of millions of rural migrants into the manufacturing and service sectors. Despite rising incidents of social unrest, the party managed to use a mixture of carrots and sticks to maintain stability. Collective leadership was preserved, ensuring a high degree of security for the ruling elites at the top (with the exception of a politically motivated corruption investigation of a Politburo member). By and large, the party stuck with the same domestic policies that had delivered unprecedented economic prosperity and political stability in the 1990s. If anything, it was during Hu's decade that China marked its spectacular rise as a global power with the hosting of the Olympics in Beijing in August 2008.

然而，表面上看，在胡锦涛担任中共中央总书记的十年间（2002-2012年），天安门事件后的秩序并未发生太大变化。中国经济持续快速增长，主要得益于2001年底中国加入世界贸易组织（WTO）后，外国直接投资和贸易蓬勃发展，同时城镇化进程持续将数千万农村人口输送到制造业和服务业。尽管社会动荡事件不断发生，但中共仍设法软硬兼施，维持了社会稳定。集体领导制度得以保留，确保了高层统治精英的高度安全（除了政治局委员因政治动机而接受的腐败调查）。总体而言，中共沿用了上世纪90年代带来前所未有的经济繁荣和政治稳定的国内政策。如果说有什么标志性事件，那就是在胡锦涛执政的十年间，中国凭借2008年8月在北京成功举办奥运会，标志着其作为全球强国的崛起。

But a closer look at the Hu era reveals the growing cracks in the post-Tiananmen order. Economic reform lost its momentum because the party under Hu introduced no new measures to accelerate the building of a market economy. Instead, it doubled down on a flawed growth model that relied excessively on investment at the expense of consumption. Inefficient state-owned enterprises retained their privileged positions in the economy. Growth was maintained largely thanks to the massive increase in foreign trade following the WTO entry and the rise of the real estate sector as a major domestic driver. In the meantime, the combination of repression of the freedom of the press, the lack of rule of law, and the party's control of immense economic resources fueled corruption and made Dengist neo-authoritarian developmentism increasingly look like crony capitalism. Practices symptomatic of regime decay, such as collusive corruption and bribing superiors for government office, became endemic.

但仔细审视胡锦涛时代，便会发现后天安门时代秩序的裂痕日益加深。经济改革失去了动力，因为胡锦涛领导下的共产党没有出台任何新措施来加速市场经济建设。相反，它加倍推行一种存在缺陷的增长模式，过度依赖投资而忽视消费。效率低下的国有企业继续保持着其在经济中的特权地位。经济增长主要得益于加入世贸组织后对外贸易的大幅增长以及房地产行业作为国内经济增长主要驱动力的崛起。与此同时，对新闻自由的压制、法治的缺失以及党对庞大经济资源的控制，助长了腐败，使得邓小平的新威权发展主义越来越像裙带资本主义。勾结腐败、贿赂上级等政权衰败的典型特征变得司空见惯。

To be sure, the party under Hu's leadership did try to address some of the social problems created by its single-minded focus on economic development during the Jiang era. The issues included rising inequality, inadequate social protection, and environmental degradation. Hu Jintao and Wen Jiabao, the premier, also attempted to make the economy less reliant on investment for growth. But their efforts were too little and too late. To make matters worse, the party responded to the global financial crisis in 2008 with a massive injection of credit. Although the stimulus sustained growth temporarily, it blew a colossal debt bubble that would create huge financial risks and constrain growth in the future.

诚然，胡锦涛领导下的中共确实试图解决江泽民时代一味追求经济发展所造成的一些社会问题，例如日益加剧的不平等、社会保障不足以及环境恶化。胡锦涛和总理温家宝也曾努力降低经济增长对投资的依赖，但他们的努力力度不够，也为时已晚。更糟糕的是，中共在2008年全球金融危机爆发后，采取了大规模信贷刺激措施。尽管这种刺激措施暂时维持了经济增长，但却催生了巨大的债务泡沫，这将造成巨大的金融风险，并在未来制约经济增长。

It is tempting to blame Jiang Zemin for the stagnation of reform under Hu. Although he nominally retired in November 2002, Jiang retained his post as chairman (commander-in-chief) of the Central Military Commission. In addition, he elevated at least four supporters to the PSC, which was expanded from seven persons to nine to accommodate Jiang's scheme.1 Jiang continued to wield enormous influence even after giving up the position of chairman of the CMC in 2004. Tellingly, judging by the fact that Hu did not succeed in obtaining the moniker "core leader," which Deng had conferred on Jiang and Xi bestowed on himself, he failed to establish uncontested authority as party chief during his tenure in office. But Jiang's political maneuvering was not the sole, or even the most important, cause of the effective demise of post-Mao reform in the Hu era. By all accounts, the neo-authoritarian model, which the party adopted fully in the wake of the crises of the Tiananmen crackdown in 1989 and the fall of the USSR in 1991, could no longer provide the intellectual guidance needed to perpetuate regime survival. With the selection of Xi Jinping as Hu's successor in November 2007, the writing was already on the wall for the post-Tiananmen order.

人们很容易将胡锦涛时期改革停滞不前归咎于江泽民。尽管江泽民名义上于2002年11月退休，但他仍然保留了中央军委主席（总司令）的职位。此外，他还提拔了至少四名支持者进入国家政治保卫委员会，该委员会的人数也从七人扩充到九人，以配合江泽民的计划。即使在2004年卸任中央军委主席之后，江泽民仍然拥有巨大的影响力。值得注意的是，胡锦涛未能获得“核心领导人”的称号——邓小平曾授予江泽民，习近平也曾授予自己这一称号——这表明他在任期间未能确立其作为党总书记的绝对权威。但是，江泽民的政治运作并非导致胡锦涛时代后毛泽东时代改革有效失败的唯一原因，甚至并非最重要的原因。种种迹象表明，中共在1989年天安门事件和1991年苏联解体危机后全面采纳的新威权模式，已无法为政权的延续提供必要的理论指导。随着2007年11月习近平被选为胡锦涛的继任者，后天安门时代的政治格局已然走向终结。





Building a Harmonious Society





建设和谐社会


By the time Hu succeeded Jiang as general secretary of the CCP, the project of building the foundations of Deng's neo-authoritarian order had largely been completed. On the economic front, Hu took over at a propitious time. After China's formal accession to the WTO in 2001, FDI began to pour into China, and exports grew explosively. The powerful economic momentum meant that, unlike Jiang in the early 1990s, Hu faced little pressure to launch new reform initiatives.

当胡锦涛接替江泽民担任中共中央总书记时，邓小平新威权秩序的基础建设已基本完成。在经济方面，胡锦涛接任的时机恰到好处。2001年中国正式加入世贸组织后，外商直接投资开始涌入中国，出口也实现了爆炸式增长。强劲的经济增长势头意味着，与上世纪90年代初的江泽民不同，胡锦涛几乎没有面临推出新改革举措的压力。

As a new leader, however, Hu needed to advance a political agenda that would bolster his authority and differentiate his performance from that of his predecessor. His challenge was to formulate and implement such an agenda without reversing Jiang's policies or clashing with Jiang directly. Practically, the consensus-based decision-making process gave a veto to Jiang's proxies on the PSC, making it difficult for Hu to effect a radical shift. These factors meant that policy change would occur only on the margins, with modest outcomes.

然而，作为新任领导人，胡锦涛需要推进一项能够巩固自身权威并与前任江泽民划清界限的政治议程。他面临的挑战是如何在不推翻江泽民政策或与其直接冲突的情况下，制定并实施这样一项议程。实际上，基于共识的决策机制赋予了江泽民在政协中的代理人否决权，使得胡锦涛难以进行根本性的政策调整。这些因素意味着政策变革只能在边缘层面发生，且收效甚微。

At first glance, Hu seemed to have inherited a booming economy. But daunting socioeconomic challenges lurked underneath. Economically, growth had become more dependent on investment. In 1992 consumption and investment accounted for 61.6 and 37.2 percent of GDP, respectively. By 2002, investment accounted for 39.4 percent of GDP, while the share of consumption fell to 58 percent.2 This unbalanced growth model threatened future sustainability because ever-increasing investment would lead to excess capacity and diminishing returns, whereas surging exports generated large trade surpluses but also tensions with China's trading partners. Socially, the party's obsessive focus on growth during the post-Tiananmen era had neglected environmental protection, income equality, and social services. Income inequality, perhaps the single most important indicator of the health of a society, worsened dramatically from 1990 to 2002, with the Gini index rising from 0.322 to 0.42.3

乍看之下，胡锦涛似乎继承了一个蓬勃发展的经济。然而，严峻的社会经济挑战却潜藏其下。经济方面，经济增长对投资的依赖程度日益加深。1992年，消费和投资分别占GDP的61.6%和37.2%。到2002年，投资占GDP的比重降至39.4%，而消费占比则下降至58%。这种不平衡的增长模式威胁着未来的可持续发展，因为不断增长的投资会导致产能过剩和收益递减，而出口激增虽然带来了巨额贸易顺差，但也加剧了与贸易伙伴之间的紧张关系。社会方面，中共在后天安门时代对经济增长的过度关注忽视了环境保护、收入平等和社会服务。收入不平等或许是衡量一个社会健康状况最重要的单一指标，在1990年至2002年间急剧恶化，基尼系数从0.322上升至0.42。

The government also underinvested in healthcare during the Jiang era. The data in table 4.1 show that the share of health spending funded by the state fell from 20.8 percent to 15.7 percent between 1992 and 2002. During the same period, employers were also paying less for workers' healthcare. This resulted in a significant increase in personal out-of-pocket spending on healthcare. In 1992 such spending accounted for about 40 percent of total healthcare spending. A decade later, this ratio had risen to 57.7 percent, representing an increase of nearly 45 percent. As this ratio is used to measure access to healthcare, people have less access to healthcare in countries where personal out-of-pocket spending on healthcare is high. In comparative terms, personal out-of-pocket spending on healthcare in China in 2002 was about three times the global average (19.3 percent).4

江泽民时期，政府对医疗保健的投入也不足。表4.1的数据显示，1992年至2002年间，国家承担的医疗卫生支出比例从20.8%下降到15.7%。同期，雇主为员工支付的医疗保健费用也减少。这导致个人自付医疗费用显著增加。1992年，个人自付医疗费用约占医疗卫生总支出的40%。十年后，这一比例上升至57.7%，增幅近45%。由于该比例用于衡量医疗服务的可及性，因此，在个人自付医疗费用较高的国家，人们获得医疗服务的机会较少。相比之下，2002年中国的个人自付医疗费用约为全球平均水平（19.3%）的三倍。

Education is another area that fell victim to government neglect under Jiang Zemin. Public spending on education from 1992 to 2002 dropped during most of the decade, and by 2002 it had barely recovered to the level it had reached a decade earlier as a share of GDP. Measured as a share of total government spending, education outlays stagnated throughout this decade (table 4.2).

教育是江泽民执政时期政府忽视的另一个领域。1992年至2002年间，公共教育支出在大部分时间里都在下降，到2002年，其占GDP的比重也仅勉强恢复到十年前的水平。若以占政府总支出的比例来衡量，教育支出在这十年间则一直停滞不前（表4.2）。

During the Jiang era, environmental protection was not a priority, either. Spending on environmental projects was woefully low throughout the 1990s—consistently less than 0.24 percent of GDP. Only in the 2000s did spending on the environment exceed 1 percent of GDP (1.13 percent in 2000 and 1.30 percent in 2002).5

江泽民时代，环境保护也并非优先事项。整个20世纪90年代，环保项目支出都极低，始终低于GDP的0.24%。直到21世纪初，环保支出才超过GDP的1%（2000年为1.13%，2002年为1.30%）。

TABLE 4.1. Share of Healthcare Spending, 1992-2002

表 4.1. 1992-2002 年医疗保健支出份额

Source: ZGTJNJ, various years.

资料来源：ZGTJNJ，历年。



TABLE 4.2. Government Spending on Education, 1992-2002

表 4.2. 1992-2002 年政府教育支出

Source: ZGTJNJ 2014, e-book.

来源：ZGTJNJ 2014，电子书。



To Hu and Wen Jiabao, the new premier who succeeded Zhu Rongji in 2003, these socioeconomic challenges presented an opportunity to offer a different agenda that would ameliorate these imbalances. Although Hu and Wen did not have close ties to each other before their rise to the top, they became temporary political allies because they shared an interest in countering the influence of Jiang's faction.

对胡锦涛和2003年接替朱镕基的新任总理温家宝而言，这些社会经济挑战为他们提供了一个契机，可以提出一套不同的方案来缓解这些不平衡现象。尽管胡锦涛和温家宝在掌权之前关系并不密切，但由于他们都希望遏制江泽民派的影响，因此成为了暂时的政治盟友。

The outbreak of SARS in early 2003, which occurred just months after Hu became CCP chief, provided both Hu and Wen with an opportunity to show that their agenda would be an improvement. Their pitch for a kinder and gentler China apparently was well received because the SARS crisis had exposed the dark side of the party's policy of growth at any cost. When the epidemic broke out, China lacked a basic public health infrastructure to provide an adequate response, such as early detection and warning, data analysis, and treatment facilities.6 Although the party relied on draconian measures to suppress a rapid spread of the virus, Hu and Wen followed up with a more comprehensive plan to address the country's mounting social deficit.

2003年初，胡锦涛就任中共总书记仅数月后，非典疫情爆发。这场疫情为胡锦涛和温家宝提供了一个契机，让他们得以展现其施政纲领的改进之处。他们提出的建设一个更加仁慈温和的中国的主张显然受到了广泛欢迎，因为非典危机暴露了中共不惜一切代价追求经济增长政策的阴暗面。疫情爆发之初，中国缺乏基本的公共卫生基础设施来提供充分的应对措施，例如早期检测和预警、数据分析以及治疗设施。尽管中共采取了严厉的措施来遏制病毒的迅速传播，但胡锦涛和温家宝随后提出了一项更为全面的计划，以解决国家日益严重的社会问题。

Hu spelled out its substance comprehensively at a July 2003 national conference reviewing party performance during the SARS crisis. Calling for "coordinated development of the economy and society," Hu maintained that even though economic development remained the party's central task, it had to be sustainable and measured not only in terms of growth but also in terms of indices such as environmental health and human development. He singled out the development of rural areas, ground zero of government neglect. Hu also pledged to invest more in public health, reform the poorly resourced healthcare system, and strengthen state capacity for order, stability, and crisis management.7

胡锦涛在2003年7月召开的全国代表大会上全面阐述了这一方针，该大会回顾了党在非典危机期间的工作。胡锦涛呼吁“经济与社会协调发展”，强调经济发展固然是党的首要任务，但必须具有可持续性，衡量经济发展的标准不仅在于增长，还在于环境卫生、人类发展等指标。他特别指出农村地区的发展，因为农村地区长期以来被政府忽视。胡锦涛还承诺加大对公共卫生的投入，改革资源匮乏的医疗卫生体系，并加强国家维护秩序、稳定和危机管理的能力。

In October 2003, Hu's agenda was given the fancy title, "Scientific Outlook of Development," which, in 2007, the party enshrined into its charter as one of its ideological tenets. Its essence was sustainable or, in Hu's signature phrase, "harmonious" development that maintains the right balance between speed and quality of economic development. In an important speech to high-ranking officials in February 2005, Hu further defined the party's goal of building a "socialist harmonious society."8

2003年10月，胡锦涛的纲领被赋予了“科学发展观”这一高大上的标题，并在2007年被党写入党章，成为其思想纲领之一。其核心是可持续发展，或者用胡锦涛的标志性说法，是“和谐发展”，即在经济发展的速度和质量之间保持适当的平衡。在2005年2月对高级官员的一次重要讲话中，胡锦涛进一步阐明了党建设“社会主义和谐社会”的目标。

The highest-profile—and much applauded—step Hu took to achieve a "socialist harmonious society" was abolition of the agricultural tax in December 2005. The amount of revenue generated by this tax—a levy on agricultural produce calculated on the basis of the land leased to farmers—was small, so the government could easily absorb the fiscal costs. Total revenue from various rural taxes (such as levies on tobacco leaves or on the nonagricultural use of arable land) was 93.6 billion yuan in 2005, the year before abolition of the agricultural tax. In 2006 tax revenue from rural sources amounted to 108.4 billion yuan. This suggests that the unpopular agricultural tax generated a relatively small amount of revenue (tax revenues from all rural sources accounted for only 3.2 percent of total tax receipts in 2005).9 Hu's reform also ended other regressive nontax levies that funded public services (such as education, public health, and law enforcement). Lost revenue was made up for with subsidies from the central government.10 Even though these measures did not significantly increase farmers' net income, they were welcomed by Chinese farmers who had long resented paying the agricultural tax and other assorted administrative fees that were collected by rural officials using brutal methods.11

胡锦涛为实现“社会主义和谐社会”所采取的最引人注目、也最受赞誉的举措，是于2005年12月废除农业税。这项税收——根据农民租赁土地面积计算的农产品税——所产生的收入数额很小，因此政府完全可以承担其财政支出。在废除农业税的前一年，即2005年，各项农村税收（例如烟叶税或耕地非农用途税）的总收入为936亿元人民币。2006年，农村税收收入达到1084亿元人民币。这表明，这项不受欢迎的农业税产生的收入相对较少（2005年农村税收总收入仅占税收总额的3.2%）。胡锦涛的改革还取消了其他一些用于资助公共服务（例如教育、公共卫生和执法）的非税收累退税项。中央政府通过补贴弥补了税收损失。尽管这些措施并未显著提高农民的净收入，但却受到了长期以来对缴纳农业税和其他各种行政费用感到不满的中国农民的欢迎，这些费用通常由农村官员以粗暴手段征收。

Another high-profile reform enacted in the early phase of Hu's tenure was abolition of a draconian regulation allowing local authorities to detain undocumented vagrats found in cities, based on the "Procedures for Detaining and the Repatriation of Vagrants and Beggars in Cities," issued by the State Council in 1982. Local authorities routinely abused this administrative rule to extort money from migrants, who were frequently maltreated and beaten in detention centers run by local governments. In March 2003, at the height of the SARS crisis, a college graduate, Sun Zhigang, was detained by police as a vagrant in Guangzhou because he was not carrying the proper identification papers. Sun was beaten to death a few days after he had been transferred to a detention center for vagrats.

胡锦涛执政初期推行的另一项引人注目的改革是废除了一项严苛的规定。该规定允许地方政府依据1982年国务院颁布的《城市流浪乞丐拘留和遣返程序》拘留在城市中发现的无证流浪人员。地方政府经常滥用这项行政规定敲诈勒索流动人口，这些流动人口在地方政府运营的拘留中心经常遭受虐待和殴打。2003年3月，正值非典疫情高峰期，大学毕业生孙志刚因未携带有效身份证件在广州被警方以流浪人员身份拘留。孙志刚被送往流浪人员拘留中心几天后，遭到殴打致死。

This scandal shocked the country because college graduates were considered elite members of society, and Sun's horrific death was a devastating illustration of the cruelty of the regulation and the lawlessness of local law enforcement officials. Seizing the opportunity, in May 2003 three liberal legal scholars petitioned the Standing Committee of the NPC to review the constitutionality of the regulation. The combined political pressure from public

这起丑闻震惊全国，因为大学毕业生被视为社会精英，而孙某的惨死则残酷地揭示了该法规的残酷性和地方执法人员的违法行为。抓住这一契机，三位自由派法学学者于2003年5月向全国人大常委会请愿，要求审查该法规的合宪性。公众舆论的共同压力促使该请愿最终得以通过。

TABLE 4.3. Estimates of the Gini Coefficient by the National Bureau of Statistics

表 4.3. 国家统计局对基尼系数的估计

Source: China Yearbook of Household Survey 2018 (Beijing: China Statistics Press, 2018), S23.

资料来源：《2018年中国家庭调查年鉴》（北京：中国统计出版社，2018年），S23。



TABLE 4.4. Government Spending on Environmental Protection, 2003-2012

表4.4. 2003-2012年政府环境保护支出

Source: ZGTJNJ 2008, e-book; ZGTJNJ 2013, e-book.

资料来源：ZGTJNJ 2008，电子书； ZGTJNJ 2013，电子书。



opinion and the legal challenge probably would not have been enough to force the new leadership to embrace a radical solution, such as abolishing the regulation. After all, the party could resort to strict censorship, and the NPC Standing Committee controlled by the party could reject the petition summarily. However, the Hu-Wen administration surprisingly announced abolition of the regulation five weeks after the legal challenge. The most likely explanation is that the new leaders were looking to burnish their public image.12

舆论和法律挑战或许不足以迫使新领导层采取激进的解决方案，例如废除该规定。毕竟，党可以诉诸严格的审查制度，而由党控制的全国人大常委会也可以断然驳回请愿。然而，在法律挑战五周后，胡文政府却出人意料地宣布废除该规定。最可能的解释是，新领导层希望借此改善其公众形象。

Judging by available data, Hu's project of building a "socialist harmonious society" achieved mixed results. His administration scored greater success in some areas than in others. The level of income inequality did not fall during his tenure, mainly because he failed to take any substantive measures, such as tax reforms or meaningful income support for the poor. Data collected by the National Bureau of Statistics show that income inequality rose slightly during Hu's decade in power. When Hu left office in 2012, income inequality had already returned to the 2002 level (table 4.3).

从现有数据来看，胡锦涛构建“社会主义和谐社会”的工程成效参差不齐。他的执政在某些领域取得了显著成就，而在其他领域则不然。在他执政期间，收入不平等程度并未下降，这主要是因为他未能采取任何实质性措施，例如税制改革或对贫困人口提供有效的收入保障。国家统计局的数据显示，胡锦涛执政的十年间，收入不平等程度略有上升。到2012年胡锦涛卸任时，收入不平等程度已回落至2002年的水平（表4.3）。

Hu scored moderately better results in the area of environmental protection, at least measured in terms of investment. Government spending on the environment steadily increased during his decade in office. Although spending stagnated during his first term, it rose meaningfully during his second term (table 4.4).

胡锦涛在环境保护领域取得了较为显著的成绩，至少从投资角度来看是如此。在他执政的十年间，政府在环境保护方面的支出稳步增长。尽管在他第一个任期内支出停滞不前，但在第二任期内却出现了显著增长（表4.4）。

Like spending on the environment, public expenditures on education stagnated during Hu's first term, but they rose measurably as a share of GDP during his second term. In 2003 education spending was 2.84 percent of GDP. In 2006 it was still only 2.93 percent. But it rose steadily from 2009 to 2012, and by the time Hu left office in 2012, government spending on education had reached 4.28 percent of GDP.13

与环境支出类似，胡锦涛第一任期内公共教育支出停滞不前，但在第二任期内，教育支出占GDP的比重显著上升。2003年，教育支出占GDP的2.84%。2006年，这一比例仅为2.93%。但从2009年到2012年，教育支出稳步增长，到胡锦涛2012年卸任时，政府教育支出已达到GDP的4.28%。

TABLE 4.5. Spending on Healthcare by Source, 2003-2012 (%)

表 4.5. 2003-2012 年医疗保健支出来源（%）

Source: ZGTJNJ 2013, e-book.

来源：ZGTJNJ 2013，电子书。



Hu made the greatest mark in terms of improving access to healthcare during his second term in power. He implemented a package of reforms in 2009 that significantly expanded access. In 2002, 45 percent of urban residents and 79 percent of rural residents had no health insurance. In 2010, a year after Hu's healthcare reform, 95 percent of the population was covered by various health insurance schemes. This was achieved mainly through large government subsidies to cover premiums and to reimburse hospitalization costs.14 As a result, access to healthcare increased significantly, as measured by the dramatic decline in personal out-of-pocket spending on health. Hu's reforms increased the share of spending covered by the government from 17 to 30 percent of total spending. The share of personal out-of-pocket spending on health fell from 56 percent in 2003 to 34 percent in 2012 (table 4.5).

胡锦涛在其第二个任期内，在改善医疗服务可及性方面取得了最显著的成就。他于2009年实施了一揽子改革，大幅扩大了医疗服务的覆盖范围。2002年，45%的城镇居民和79%的农村居民没有医疗保险。2010年，即胡锦涛医改一年后，95%的人口都享有各种医疗保险。这主要得益于政府的大量补贴，用于支付保费和报销住院费用。因此，医疗服务的可及性显著提高，个人自付医疗费用大幅下降便是明证。胡锦涛的改革使政府承担的医疗支出比例从17%提高到30%。个人自付医疗费用比例从2003年的56%下降到2012年的34%（表4.5）。

However, by the more commonly used measure of human welfare—the Human Development Index (HDI) developed by the United Nations Development Program (UNDP)—the progress made by Hu's project to build a "socialist harmonious society" achieved a magnitude of improvement in China's HDI from 2003 to 2012 that was similar to that gained during the Jiang period. The HDI rose 8 basis points, or an improvement of 15.7 percent under Jiang. During the 2003-2012 period, China's HDI rose 9 basis points, representing an improvement of 14.8 percent (table 4.6).

然而，按照更常用的衡量人类福祉的指标——联合国开发计划署（UNDP）制定的人类发展指数（HDI）——胡锦涛领导的“社会主义和谐社会”建设工程所取得的进展，使得中国2003年至2012年间的HDI提升幅度与江泽民时期相近。江泽民时期，HDI上升了8个基点，增幅为15.7%。而在2003年至2012年期间，中国的HDI上升了9个基点，增幅为14.8%（见表4.6）。

Based on his record in addressing China's social deficit, Hu's decade in power may be divided into two phases. He scored marginal progress during his first term, most likely due to his lack of authority and the residual influence of Jiang Zemin. Since any substantial modification of Jiang's policies that

根据胡锦涛在解决中国社会赤字问题上的政绩，他十年的执政生涯可以分为两个阶段。第一阶段他取得的进展甚微，这很可能是由于他缺乏权威以及江泽民的残余影响。由于江泽民的政策几乎没有进行任何实质性的改变，

TABLE 4.6. China's Human Development Index, 1993-2012

表4.6. 1993-2012年中国人类发展指数

Source: UNDP, China National Human Development Report (2019), https://hdr.undp.org/system/files/documents/nhdrcnpdf.pdf, 271-72.

资料来源：联合国开发计划署，《中国国家人类发展报告（2019）》，https://hdr.undp.org/system/files/documents/nhdrcnpdf.pdf，271-72。



prioritized growth would have been perceived as a repudiation of Jiang, Jiang's proxies on the PSC and Jiang himself would not have supported such a course correction. Hu managed to do more to implement his agenda of building a "socialist harmonious society" during his second term, likely because of the dilution of Jiang's power on the PSC after the fall 2007 Seventeenth Party Congress, which elevated Xi Jinping and Li Keqiang to the PSC and as designated successors to Hu and Wen, respectively. The fiscal windfall produced by China's rapid growth following WTO entry (government revenue grew at an annual average of 21 percent during 2002-2007) also allowed the party to allocate more resources to social spending.15

优先发展经济增长会被视为对江泽民的否定，江泽民在国家政治保卫委员会的代理人以及江泽民本人都不会支持这样的路线调整。胡锦涛在其第二个任期内，在推进建设“社会主义和谐社会”的议程方面取得了更多进展，这很可能是因为2007年秋季召开的中共十七大后，江泽民在国家政治保卫委员会的权力被削弱，习近平和李克强分别被推举为国家政治保卫委员会委员，并被指定为胡锦涛和温家宝的接班人。中国加入世贸组织后经济的快速增长带来的财政收入（2002年至2007年政府收入年均增长21%）也使党能够将更多资源投入社会支出。

Nevertheless, Hu's "socialist harmonious society" was at best a modest success because the program adopted only partial measures that relied on moderate increases in government spending but did not change the underlying political incentives or institutional factors behind the rise in the social deficit. For example, promotion of party officials continued to depend on their meeting specific economic or fiscal targets, not their record in improving the livelihoods of citizens.16 Notably, Hu made no attempts to give ordinary people a stronger voice in determining government priorities, nor did he enact reforms that would hurt the interests of the powerful constituencies, such as SOEs, state-controlled health providers, education bureaucracies, and the party-state itself, all of which benefited from policies that channeled resources to the haves from the have-nots.17 This explains why Hu's "socialist harmonious society" project had no impact on reducing China's high-income inequality, which reached a peak during his tenure and remained unchanged upon his departure from office. The party under Hu did make the slice of the pie for ordinary people slightly bigger, but the bulk of the economic benefits from growth was still accessible only to an exclusive elite—most important, party and government officials and their family members.

然而，胡锦涛的“社会主义和谐社会”充其量只能算作小有成就，因为该方案仅采取了局部措施，依赖于适度增加政府支出，但并未改变社会赤字加剧背后的根本政治动机或制度因素。例如，党政官员的晋升仍然取决于他们是否完成特定的经济或财政指标，而不是他们改善民生的政绩。值得注意的是，胡锦涛既没有努力让普通民众在政府优先事项的制定中拥有更大的发言权，也没有推行任何会损害国有企业、国营医疗机构、教育官僚机构以及党国自身等强大利益集团利益的改革。这些集团都受益于将资源从穷人转移到富人的政策。这就解释了为什么胡锦涛的“社会主义和谐社会”计划未能有效降低中国严重的收入不平等。收入不平等在他执政期间达到顶峰，并在他卸任后依然没有改变。胡锦涛领导下的共产党确实让普通民众分得的蛋糕稍微大了一些，但经济增长带来的大部分好处仍然只有少数精英才能获得——最重要的是，党政官员及其家属。





Social Unrest and the Rise of the Security State





社会动荡与安全国家的兴起


After the crushing of the prodemocracy movement in June 1989, the party faced negligible overt political opposition to its rule as most of leaders of the movement were either jailed or exiled. In the two decades after the Tiananmen crisis, however, a new source of threat emerged: various forms of collective protests by ordinary people who were being victimized by government policies and official abuses of power.18 In the early 1990s the number of such protests, officially labeled "mass incidents," was in the thousands each year (for example, 8,700 "mass incidents" allegedly took place in 1993). Over time, such incidents grew more frequent and attracted more participants. In the public domain, there are few reliable official data on the number, size, and duration of mass incidents. In 2003, the beginning of the Hu-Wen era, around 60,000 mass incidents were reported. In 2006 the number of such incidents exceeded 90,000. The total number of participants in these incidents rose from an estimated 730,000 to over 3 million.19

1989年6月镇压民主运动后，由于运动的大部分领导人被监禁或流放，党几乎没有面临公开的政治反对。然而，在天安门事件后的二十年里，一种新的威胁出现了：普通民众因政府政策和官员滥用权力而发起的各种形式的集体抗议。20世纪90年代初，此类抗议活动（官方称之为“群体事件”）每年数以千计（例如，据称1993年发生了8700起“群体事件”）。随着时间的推移，此类事件愈发频繁，参与人数也越来越多。在公共领域，关于群体事件的数量、规模和持续时间，可靠的官方数据寥寥无几。2003年，即胡文执政初期，据报道发生了约6万起群体事件。 2006年，此类事件的数量超过9万起。这些事件的参与者总数从估计的73万人增加到超过300万人。

Despite the catch-all label of "mass incidents," these acts of protest and resistance had divergent causes, ranging from labor disputes, illegal land seizures, forced evictions, and environmental pollution to draconian enforcement of the one-child policy, oppression of ethnic minorities, and other conflicts between the state and ordinary people. Data on collective petitions (considered one type of mass incidents) in Hunan for 1994-1995 and 2000-2001 show that labor disputes accounted for the largest share of such incidents (roughly one-half). The second category of collective disputes (around 15 percent) involved rural issues (land seizures and brutal enforcement of government policies). Conflicts between workers and employers (mainly SOEs) made up the lion's share of the collective protests in 2000-2001 mainly because the SOEs were struggling financially and their mass bankruptcies at the end of the 1990s had left millions of workers without minimal social protections.20 A study examining only large-scale social protests (that included more than five hundred participants) from 2000 to 2010 reached similar conclusions. Labor disputes in state and nonstate firms accounted for 53 percent of such incidents. Conflicts over land seizures and land use made up 16 percent. Protests over environmental pollution and ethnic oppression represented a very small share (4 and 2 percent of total reported incidents, respectively).21

尽管“群体事件”这一标签包罗万象，但这些抗议和抵抗行为的起因却各不相同，涵盖了劳资纠纷、非法征地、强拆、环境污染，以及独生子女政策的严苛执行、少数民族压迫等国家与民众之间的冲突。湖南省1994-1995年和2000-2001年集体请愿（被视为群体事件的一种类型）的数据显示，劳资纠纷占此类事件的最大比例（约占一半）。第二类集体纠纷（约占15%）涉及农村问题（土地征用和政府政策的残酷执行）。 2000-2001年间，劳资冲突（主要涉及国有企业）占据了集体抗议活动的绝大部分，这主要是因为国有企业当时面临财务困境，且上世纪90年代末的大规模破产导致数百万工人失去了基本的社会保障。一项仅针对2000年至2010年间大规模社会抗议活动（参与者超过500人）的研究也得出了类似的结论。国有和非国有企业的劳资纠纷占此类事件的53%。土地征用和土地使用纠纷占16%。针对环境污染和种族压迫的抗议活动所占比例很小（分别占报告事件总数的4%和2%）。

Although specific incidents of abuses of power or lawlessness by government officials might have triggered such protests, underlying flaws in the Chinese system of governance were the deeper causes. One clear culprit was the system the party had developed to evaluate officials' performance, which gave disproportional weight to economic growth and consequently incentivized officials to favor actions that would boost growth in the short term regardless of the social costs. Illegal land seizures or urban evictions might harm a large number of ordinary people, but the economic gains from developing real estate projects on the land could boost a local official's chances for juicing up growth and making that official a more competitive candidate for promotion.22 Another institutional cause of the collective protests is the lack of peaceful channels of conflict resolution, especially when the state is party to the conflict. Despite the existence of a law allowing citizens to sue local officials and to seek judicial relief, it seldom produces the desired outcomes because local officials effectively control the courts (and the party is literally above the law since it cannot be sued).23 Ironically, the party's own efforts to improve governance may have even fueled the popular protests. In an effort to make post-Mao governance less arbitrary, the party has promulgated a large number of rules that ostensibly set boundaries on the exercise of power by government officials. But instead of improved governance, the existence of this large body of rules seems to have produced the worst of two worlds: Local officials ignore or violate these rules because they restrict their freedom of action, while ordinary people, aware of the rightsannunciated by the rules, are more emboldened to assert their claims. This combination lies behind the rise of China's "rightful resistance."24

尽管政府官员滥用职权或违法行为的具体事件可能引发了此类抗议，但中国治理体系的根本缺陷才是更深层次的原因。其中一个显而易见的罪魁祸首是党制定的官员绩效考核体系，该体系过度重视经济增长，从而激励官员采取短期内能够促进经济增长的行动，而不顾社会成本。非法征地或城市强拆可能会损害大量普通民众的利益，但开发土地上的房地产项目所带来的经济收益可以提高地方官员刺激经济增长的机会，并使他们成为更有竞争力的晋升候选人。22 集体抗议的另一个制度性原因是缺乏和平解决冲突的渠道，尤其是在国家卷入冲突的情况下。尽管法律允许公民起诉地方官员并寻求司法救济，但很少能达到预期效果，因为地方官员实际上控制着法院（而且党凌驾于法律之上，因为它不能被起诉）。23 讽刺的是，党自身为改善治理所做的努力甚至可能助长了民众抗议。为了使后毛泽东时代的治理更加公正，党颁布了大量规则，表面上是为了限制政府官员行使权力。但这些规则的存在非但没有改善治理，反而造成了最糟糕的局面：地方官员因为这些规则限制了他们的行动自由而忽视或违反这些规则，而普通民众因为了解规则所规定的权利而更加大胆地维护自身权益。这种矛盾的结合正是中国“正义抵抗”兴起的根源。24

Even though the dramatic increase in the number of collective protests in the Hu-Wen era attracted extensive attention from journalists and researchers and alarmed the Chinese government, the immediate political impact of these incidents was limited. Most were set off by specific socioeconomic, not political, grievances. The demands of the participants were specific, such as requests for payment of back wages or return of illegally seized property. Despite the label of "mass incidents," large-scale protests were relatively rare. Because they were either poorly organized or unorganized altogether, the duration of such protests was short, with most incidents lasting only one to several days. Notably, such protests were geographically isolated and seldom spread beyond the boundaries of a county or district, thus limiting their impact.25 In addition, the party quickly learned how to quell such collective protests by mixing repressive tactics (severe punishment of the protest leaders) with concessions (such as wholly or partially meeting the demands of the protesters).26

尽管虎文时代集体抗议活动的激增引起了记者和研究人员的广泛关注，也引起了中国政府的警觉，但这些事件的直接政治影响有限。大多数抗议活动是由具体的社会经济问题而非政治问题引发的。参与者的诉求也很具体，例如要求支付拖欠工资或归还被非法扣押的财产。尽管被贴上了“群体事件”的标签，但大规模抗议活动相对较少。由于这些抗议活动要么组织不力，要么完全没有组织，因此持续时间很短，大多数事件只持续一到几天。值得注意的是，这些抗议活动在地理位置上较为孤立，很少蔓延到县或区以外，从而限制了其影响。此外，党很快学会了如何通过将镇压手段（严厉惩罚抗议领导人）与让步（例如全部或部分满足抗议者的诉求）相结合来平息此类集体抗议活动。

The rise of incidents of social unrest nevertheless prompted the party to embrace a comprehensive strategy to strengthen regime security, ushering in an era of "stability maintenance" (weiwen). To be sure, the party began to bolster its repressive capacity immediately after the Tiananmen crackdown in 1989, but it subsequently developed more refined tactics of repression. In the face of growing social unrest, the party doubled down on its investment in its repressive capacity.

尽管如此，社会动荡事件的增加促使党采取全面战略加强政权安全，开启了“维稳”时代。诚然，党在1989年天安门事件后立即开始加强镇压能力，但随后发展出更为精细的镇压策略。面对日益严重的社会动荡，党加大了对镇压能力的投入。

In November 2003 the party issued a key directive on domestic security, "The CCP Decision on Further Strengthening and Improving Public Security Work."27 This directive lists a broad range of threats: "infiltration" by external and internal hostile forces, ethnic splittist forces, sabotage activities by religious extremists and terrorist groups, illegal activities by Falungong and other "evil sects," individuals with the potential of endangering state security and social stability, and mass incidents. The document pledges increases in funding, an expansion of security forces, and adoption of advanced policing and surveillance technologies.

2003年11月，中共发布了一项关于国内安全的重要指令——《关于进一步加强和完善公共安全工作的决定》。该指令列举了一系列威胁：外部和内部敌对势力的“渗透”、民族分裂势力、宗教极端分子和恐怖组织的破坏活动、法轮功等“邪教”的非法活动、可能危害国家安全和社会稳定的个人以及群体性事件。该文件承诺增加公共安全经费，扩充安全部队，并采用先进的警务和监控技术。

During the Hu-Wen period, two hard-liners were put in charge of domestic security. Luo Gan, a protégé of former premier Li Peng, concurrently also served from 2002 to 2007 on the PSC as well as the party's Central Political and Legal Commission (as director), responsible for domestic security. He was succeeded by Zhou Yongkang, who oversaw domestic security affairs from 2007 to 2012 (Zhou would be the most prominent victim of Xi Jinping's purgege in 2013).

在胡文时期，两名强硬派人士掌管国内安全。罗干是前总理李鹏的亲信，2002年至2007年间同时担任国家安全委员会委员和中共中央政法委主任，负责国内安全事务。他的继任者是周永康，周永康于2007年至2012年间负责国内安全事务（周永康是2013年习近平清洗行动中最引人注目的受害者）。

Due to the rapid increase in government revenue during the Hu-Wen era, the party was able to invest immense resources in its coercive apparatus. Nominal spending on law enforcement (police, procuratorate, and courts) rose from 110 billion yuan in 2002 to 711 billion yuan in 2012. Adjusted for inflation, this represents a real increase of 400 percent.28

由于胡文时期政府财政收入迅速增长，党得以投入巨资发展其强制机构。执法（警察、检察院和法院）名义支出从2002年的1100亿元人民币增至2012年的7110亿元人民币。经通货膨胀调整后，实际增幅高达400%。

Generous funding enabled the party to acquire new technological capabilities for surveillance. The first phase of the "Golden Shield" project was unveiled in 1998. The program, designed to modernize the information technology systems of the Chinese police, was completed in 2005. According to the Ministry of Public Security, the Golden Shield contains basic population information, DNA data, and specialized software programs performing dedicated tasks. The infamous "Great Fire Wall of China," a system of filtering and blocking information the party deems to be harmful or subversive, was part of the Golden Shield.29 However, the party's strategy of neutralizing the threats of the information revolution went beyond the adoption of technology. It also heavily relied on other tools, such as regulations (mandating real-name registration of users of social media and requiring users of internet cafés to scan their national identification cards to gain access to the web) and organization (establishing a party-state bureaucracy, the Cyberspace Administration, and a specialized internet police unit).30 Tactically, the party learned to censor the internet with greater sophistication by prioritizing prevention of dissemination of information likely to encourage collective actions.31 The Chinese model of “networked authoritarianism” has been remarkably effective in addressing a novel threat that prominent observers, including former American president Bill Clinton, thought would be impossible to contain.32

充足的资金使党得以获得新的监控技术能力。“金盾”计划第一阶段于1998年启动。该计划旨在实现中国警察信息技术系统的现代化，并于2005年完成。据公安部称，“金盾”包含基本人口信息、DNA数据以及执行特定任务的专用软件程序。臭名昭著的“防火长城”——一套过滤和屏蔽党认为有害或颠覆性信息的系统——也是“金盾”计划的一部分。然而，党应对信息革命威胁的战略远不止于技术应用。它还大量依赖其他工具，例如法规（强制社交媒体用户实名注册，要求网吧用户刷身份证才能上网）和组织（建立党国官僚机构、国家互联网信息办公室和专门的网络警察部门）。30 在策略上，中共学会了更精细地审查互联网，优先阻止可能鼓励集体行动的信息传播。31 中国这种“网络威权主义”模式在应对一种新型威胁方面非常有效，而包括美国前总统比尔·克林顿在内的许多知名观察家都认为这种威胁无法遏制。32

Another key component of China's techno-surveillance state, consisting mainly of ubiquitous video cameras and sensors, was also built during the Hu era. In 2004 the government launched the Skynet project (formally known as the "City Alert and Surveillance Technological System"), a hi-tech video and sensor surveillance program.33 As revealed in an official document, Skynet consists of an elaborate system of surveillance using high-definition cameras, fiber-optic cables, sensors, servers, special software applications, and data resources. It is capable of conducting real-time visual surveillance of streets, highways, and other public venues, and of storing images for various purposes. Repeated technological upgrades later provided Skynet invisible electronic checkpoints equipped with cameras, license plate readers, Wi-Fi sniffers (to collect mobile phone information), and facial recognition technology.34 In addition to adopting advanced surveillance technologies, in the mid-2000s the party established more specialized bureaucracies to oversee "stability-maintenance offices," with a full-time staff and a large network of informants.35

中国科技监控体系的另一关键组成部分，主要由无处不在的摄像头和传感器构成，也是在胡锦涛时代建立的。2004年，政府启动了“天网”项目（正式名称为“城市预警与监控技术系统”），这是一个高科技的视频和传感器监控项目。一份官方文件披露，“天网”由一套复杂的监控系统组成，该系统利用高清摄像头、光纤电缆、传感器、服务器、专用软件和数据资源。它能够对街道、公路和其他公共场所进行实时视频监控，并将图像存储用于各种用途。随后，技术不断升级，最终形成了“天网”式的隐形电子检查站，配备了摄像头、车牌识别器、Wi-Fi嗅探器（用于收集手机信息）和人脸识别技术。34 除了采用先进的监控技术外，在2000年代中期，中共还建立了更加专业的官僚机构来监管“稳定维护办公室”，这些办公室配备了全职人员和庞大的线人网络。35

Conceptually and institutionally, the party under Jiang Zemin can possibly be credited with introducing the essential framework of selective repression. Operationally, selective repression was significantly upgraded with financial resources and technological capabilities under Hu Jintao. Even though Hu's rule is considered a period of political stagnation, this characterization obviously does not apply to the case of strengthening the coercive capacity of the Chinese state.

从概念和制度层面来看，江泽民领导的共产党或许可以被认为是选择性镇压基本框架的奠基人。而胡锦涛时期，选择性镇压在财政资源和技术能力方面得到了显著提升。尽管胡锦涛的统治时期被认为是政治停滞的时期，但这种描述显然并不适用于加强中国政府强制力的情况。





Civil Society and "Rights Defense"





公民社会与“权利捍卫”


The party's ability to maintain its political monopoly in spite of the rapid economic development in the post-Tiananmen era has raised doubts about the validity and applicability of modernization theory to China. The association between high levels of income and democracy, which is found in nearly all societies (with the exception of the oil-rich dictatorships), remains missing in China.36 However, it is both oversimplistic and untrue to claim that, even in the case of post-Tiananmen China, sustained and rapid economic development did not contribute to the growth of forces and movements normally associated with civil society and democratization. Influential studies on the process of democratizing authoritarian regimes demonstrate that bottom-up pressures produced by economic modernization alone do not lead to democratic transitions. The most critical factor is the emergence of elites favoring political liberalization within the authoritarian regime.37 As I show in this section, sustained economic development in the post-Tiananmen era contributed to the rise of a broad but unorganized social movement that challenged one-party rule using flexible and sophisticated tactics. This "rights defense" movement featured activist lawyers and liberal journalists who could generate substantial political pressure on the party. To be sure, the party's successful prevention of the growth of this movement into a broad organized political opposition was mainly the result of the regime's coercive capacity and not of a failure of economic development to produce prodemocracy social forces.

尽管后天安门时代中国经济快速发展，但中共仍能维持其政治垄断地位，这引发了人们对现代化理论在中国适用性的质疑。几乎所有社会（石油资源丰富的独裁政权除外）都存在高收入与民主之间的关联，而这种关联在中国却并不存在。然而，即便在后天安门时代的中国，持续快速的经济发展也未能促进通常与公民社会和民主化相关的各种力量和运动的发展，这种说法既过于简单化，也不符合事实。关于威权政权民主化进程的诸多重要研究表明，仅靠经济现代化带来的自下而上的压力并不能促成民主转型。最关键的因素是威权政权内部涌现出一批支持政治自由化的精英。正如我在本节中所述，后天安门时代的持续经济发展促成了一场规模庞大但组织松散的社会运动的兴起，这场运动运用灵活而老练的策略挑战一党专政。这场“维权”运动的代表人物包括维权律师和自由派记者，他们能够对执政党施加巨大的政治压力。诚然，执政党成功阻止了这场运动发展成为一支广泛的、有组织的政治反对力量，这主要归功于政权的强制力，而非经济发展未能催生出支持民主的社会力量。

The rights defense movement can be traced to the tragedy of Sun Zhigang, a college graduate beaten to death in a detention center for vagrants in Guangzhou, in March 2003. Shortly after this incident, public pressure forced the government to abrogate the notorious regulation blamed for causing Sun's death, marking the first major victory of the rights defense movement.38 Although individual acts of defiance against one-party rule occurred frequently during the Jiang era, they lacked the two defining characteristics of the rights defense movement of the Hu era: the role played by an informal coalition of lawyers, journalists, and human rights activists in asserting the constitutional rights of Chinese citizens, and the impact of public opinion that was amplified by the internet. Leaders of the rights defense movement were mainly activist lawyers who had received formal legal education in the post-Mao era and become the public face of the movement.39 The number of lawyers participating in the movement is unknown. Teng Biao, one of the leading human rights lawyers associated with the movement, estimates that, when it began in 2003, no more than three dozen lawyers were actively engaged in "rights defense." But by 2015, perhaps as many as a thousand lawyers were associated with the movement.40 Yu Zhengsheng, the Shanghai party boss (2007-2012), has claimed that about 3 percent of China's 270,000 lawyers were "rebellious," implying that as many as 8,000 might have been engaging in activities the party disliked.41

维权运动的起源可以追溯到2003年3月孙志刚在广州流浪人员拘留中心被殴打致死的悲剧。孙志刚是一名大学毕业生。事件发生后不久，公众压力迫使政府废除了导致孙志刚死亡的臭名昭著的《反流法》，这标志着维权运动取得了第一次重大胜利。尽管在江泽民时代，个人反抗一党专政的行为屡见不鲜，但这些行为缺乏胡锦涛时代维权运动的两个显著特征：一是律师、记者和人权活动家组成的非正式联盟在维护中国公民宪法权利方面发挥的作用；二是互联网放大的舆论影响力。维权运动的领导者主要是毛泽东时代后接受过正规法律教育的维权律师，他们成为这场运动的公众代言人。参与这场运动的律师人数尚不清楚。与这场运动密切相关的著名人权律师滕彪估计，2003年运动初期，积极参与“维权”的律师不超过30人。但到了2015年，参与这场运动的律师人数可能高达1000人。上海市委书记于正生（2007-2012年）声称，中国27万律师中约有3%是“反叛”律师，这意味着可能有多达8000名律师从事了党不喜欢的活动。

Compared with the Jiang era, the Hu era was a more favorable period for a social movement, such as the rights defense movement, to grow and gain influence. The soft-authoritarian rule practiced by Jiang and Hu relied more on intimidation than on brute force, allowing a large gray area in which human rights activists could test the boundaries set by the regime. Because the party had promulgated a large body of laws and regulations that ostensibly claimed to protect the rights of ordinary people and, toward the end of his rule, Jiang himself promoted the slogan of "ruling the country according to law" (not the "rule of law"), human rights lawyers could take advantage of the very laws issued by the party to engage in activities that challenged its exercise of power.42 Additionally, the advent of the internet created a new and powerful platform for "rights defenders" to rally public opinion. When Hu became party chief at the end of 2002, the number of Chinese citizens with access to the internet was 59 million. By the end of 2012, 564 million Chinese people had access.43

与江泽民时代相比，胡锦涛时代更有利于维权运动等社会运动的发展壮大。江泽民和胡锦涛奉行的软性威权统治更多地依赖威慑而非武力，这为维权人士提供了广阔的灰色地带，使他们得以试探政权设定的界限。由于党颁布了大量表面上旨在保护普通民众权利的法律法规，而且在江泽民执政后期，他本人还大力宣传“依法治国”（而非“法治”）的口号，维权人士得以利用党颁布的法律，开展挑战其权力行使的活动。此外，互联网的出现也为“维权人士”动员舆论提供了一个强大而新的平台。2002年底胡锦涛就任中共中央总书记时，中国互联网用户已达5900万。截至2012年底，中国有5.64亿人可以使用互联网。





Public Interest Litigation





公益诉讼


A core strategy of the activists in the "rights defense" movement was to challenge the government on issues that resonated with the public, such as environmental pollution, employment discrimination, and food safety. Because suing the government in Chinese courts or advocating on behalf of the rights of victims of pollution and unsafe food was the only feasible option, public interest litigation became the most frequently used tactic of the "rights defenders" during the Hu era. One representative case illustrating how the rights defenders utilized public interest litigation to challenge the party is that of discrimination against individuals carrying the hepatitis-B virus.

“维权”运动的核心策略之一是就环境污染、就业歧视和食品安全等公众关注的问题挑战政府。由于在中国法院起诉政府或为污染和食品安全受害者维权是唯一可行的选择，公益诉讼成为胡锦涛时代“维权人士”最常用的策略。一个典型案例便是维权人士如何利用公益诉讼挑战党的政策，即针对乙肝病毒携带者的歧视案。

Hepatitis-B is one of the most prevalent diseases in China. Based on a survey of blood samples collected at the end of 2014, it is estimated that 86 million Chinese carried the hepatitis-B virus at that time.44 But people infected with the virus were ineligible for employment regardless of their qualifications. In December 2003, a college graduate sued the government of Wuhu city in Anhui for determining that he was ineligible to take the civil service exam because he had tested positive for the hepatitis-B virus. His lawyer, a legal scholar specializing in human rights law, convincingly argued that the provincial government's prohibition against hepatitis-B virus carriers violated a national law and the constitutional rights of the applicant. The court of first instance ruled in favor of the applicant.45 The rare legal victory paved the way for removal of this discriminatory rule in 2005.

乙型肝炎是中国最常见的疾病之一。根据2014年底采集的血液样本调查，估计当时有8600万中国人携带乙型肝炎病毒。但无论资质如何，感染乙肝病毒的人都无法获得工作机会。2003年12月，一名大学毕业生起诉安徽省芜湖市政府，指控其因乙肝病毒检测呈阳性而丧失公务员考试资格。他的律师是一位专攻人权法的法学专家，他有力地论证了省政府禁止乙肝病毒携带者参加公务员考试的规定违反了国家法律和申请人的宪法权利。一审法院判决申请人胜诉。这一罕见的法律胜利为2005年废除这项歧视性规定铺平了道路。

Another representative case is the "Sanlu poisonous baby formula" case. In early September 2008 the government acknowledged that the Sanlu Group, one of the country's largest producers of baby formula, had been adding a hazardous substance, melamine, to its products to raise their protein content. The contaminated baby formula made more than 300,000 children sick and caused at least six deaths.46 In the wake of the scandal, a group of human rights lawyers offered legal representation to the families of the children harmed by the tainted formula. Many lawsuits were subsequently filed against Sanlu. Under public pressure, the government punished some of the individuals directly implicated in the scandal and launched a nationwide campaign to check future levels of melamine in baby formula.47

另一个典型案例是“三鹿毒奶粉案”。2008年9月初，政府承认，中国最大的婴儿配方奶粉生产商之一三鹿集团为了提高产品蛋白质含量，在奶粉中添加了有害物质三聚氰胺。受污染的奶粉导致超过30万名儿童患病，至少6人死亡。丑闻曝光后，一群人权律师为受害儿童的家庭提供法律援助。随后，针对三鹿集团提起了多起诉讼。在公众压力下，政府惩处了部分直接涉案人员，并开展了全国范围的奶粉三聚氰胺含量检测活动。





Advocating for the Voiceless





为无声者发声


The progrowth policies of the party in the post-Tiananmen era created both winners and losers. While the winners enjoyed a standard of living few could have imagined merely a decade earlier, the losers lacked advocates for their rights—until the emergence of the "rights defenders" in the early 2000s. Human rights activists and lawyers relied on the same playbook to advance their cause: After the emergence of a major scandal, they would offer legal representation to the victims and rally public opinion to pressure the government. In some cases, their efforts succeeded in forcing the government to take remedial actions. Even in cases where they failed to help the victims gain compensation or judicial relief, human rights activists managed to expose the callousness, incompetence, and corruption of the local authorities and to puncture the myth of the superiority of a prodevelopment autocracy.

天安门事件后，党的促增长政策造就了赢家和输家。赢家享受到了十年前几乎无人能想象的生活水平，而输家却缺乏权利维护者——直到21世纪初“人权捍卫者”的出现。人权活动家和律师们遵循着同样的策略：在重大丑闻曝光后，他们为受害者提供法律援助，并动员舆论向政府施压。在某些情况下，他们的努力成功迫使政府采取补救措施。即使在未能帮助受害者获得赔偿或司法救济的情况下，人权活动家们也成功地揭露了地方当局的冷漠、无能和腐败，并戳破了促发展专制政权优越性的神话。

One such example is the case of slave labor in Shanxi. In May 2007 investigative journalists uncovered a scandal that shocked the nation. Several politically connected operators of brick kilns were employing dozens of enslaved laborers, including kidnapped underage boys and mentally handicapped persons, and making them work under inhumane conditions. The ensuing public outrage forced the government to send a special investigation team from Beijing to punish the kiln operators and their political patrons. In the wake of the scandal, several human rights lawyers represented some of the victims in a civil suit seeking compensation. Although the court rejected the lawsuit, the publicity surrounding the scandal helped raise public awareness of labor rights and shine an unflattering spotlight on the image-conscious Chinese government.48

山西的奴工事件就是一个例子。2007年5月，调查记者揭露了一桩震惊全国的丑闻。几家与政界关系密切的砖窑经营者雇佣了数十名奴工，其中包括被拐卖的未成年男孩和智障人士，并强迫他们在非人道的条件下工作。由此引发的公众强烈愤慨迫使政府从北京派遣特别调查组，惩处这些砖窑经营者及其政治靠山。丑闻曝光后，一些人权律师代表部分受害者提起民事诉讼，寻求赔偿。尽管法院驳回了诉讼，但丑闻的曝光提高了公众对劳动权利的认识，也让注重形象的中国政府颜面尽失。

Another representative case is the Henan HIV/AIDS scandal. In the 1990s poor rural residents in Henan province sold blood plasma to shady operations run by well-connected individuals. Because these individuals used the same but undisinfected needle to collect blood plasma, the practice resulted in transmitting the HIV virus to the sellers of the blood plasma. Worse still, the virus-carrying blood plasma was later used to treat other patients. In total an estimated 150,000 people were infected through these two transmission mechanisms. But the Henan provincial government covered up the scandal. Leading rights defenders tirelessly championed the cause of the victims and called on the government to take urgent action. Human rights lawyers also defended those victims who were demanding medical treatment.49

另一个典型案例是河南艾滋病丑闻。上世纪90年代，河南省贫困农村居民将血浆卖给一些由关系网强大的个人经营的非法机构。由于这些机构使用未经消毒的针头采集血浆，导致艾滋病毒传播给血浆出售者。更糟糕的是，这些携带病毒的血浆后来还被用于治疗其他患者。据估计，通过这两种传播途径，共有15万人感染了艾滋病毒。但河南省政府掩盖了这一丑闻。人权活动家们不懈地为受害者奔走呼吁，敦促政府采取紧急行动。人权律师也为那些要求接受治疗的受害者提供法律援助。





High-Profile Sensitive Cases





备受瞩目的敏感案件


Rights defenders—mainly lawyers and human rights activists—were prominent players in the most politically sensitive legal cases during the Hu era. They employed a well-honed strategy to assert the rights of Chinese citizens and expose the dark side of the post-Tiananmen order. Typically, activist lawyers would offer their services to victims of political persecution, corruption, environmental pollution, and violators of food safety rules and labor laws. Once retained, the lawyers would vigorously assert the legal rights of these victims and contest, in criminal proceedings, the charges being leveled against them by the government. At the same time, the rights defenders used the media and the internet to rally public opinion to their cause. Although these efforts did not always succeed in winning justice in a legal system in the firm grip of the party, rights defenders sometimes managed to help their clients avoid harsher penalties when acquittal was impossible. In the court of public opinion, the rights defenders seemed to be clear winners since their involvement generated popular support for their clients and undermined the party's moral authority.

在胡锦涛时代，维权人士——主要是律师和人权活动家——在最具政治敏感性的法律案件中扮演着举足轻重的角色。他们运用一套精心设计的策略来维护中国公民的权利，并揭露天安门事件后秩序的阴暗面。通常情况下，维权律师会为政治迫害、腐败、环境污染以及违反食品安全和劳动法规的受害者提供法律服务。一旦受聘，律师们便会积极维护这些受害者的合法权益，并在刑事诉讼中对政府提出的指控进行抗辩。与此同时，维权人士还利用媒体和互联网来争取公众舆论的支持。尽管在党牢牢掌控的法律体系中，这些努力并非总能成功伸张正义，但维权人士有时也能在无罪释放无望的情况下，帮助他们的委托人避免更严厉的惩罚。在舆论场上，维权人士似乎是明显的赢家，因为他们的参与赢得了公众对其委托人的支持，并削弱了党的道德权威。

One of the most high-profile cases that such rights defenders represented is that of the "Taishi village incident." In July 2005 residents of Taishi village, near Guangzhou, started a process to impeach the director of the village committee because of his mismanagement of village finances and suspected corruption. However, the party viewed this incident as a direct challenge to its authority and dispatched riot police to the village to clear the protesting villagers from the offices of the village committee. During the two-month standoff between police and villagers, several human rights activists and lawyers went to the village to provide moral support and legal advice. The incident reportedly raised alarms at the highest level of the Chinese leadership. Although the government eventually relied on high-pressure tactics to quash the protest and restore control in the village, the incident represents another milestone in the rights defense movement during the post-Tiananmen era.50

人权捍卫者代理的最引人注目的案件之一是“太石村事件”。2005年7月，广州附近太石村的村民开始弹劾村委会主任，原因是其管理不善村财政并涉嫌贪污。然而，中共将此事件视为对其权威的直接挑战，并派遣防暴警察进驻该村，将抗议的村民从村委会办公室驱离。在长达两个月的警民对峙期间，多位人权活动家和律师前往该村，提供道义支持和法律援助。据报道，该事件引起了中国最高领导层的警觉。尽管政府最终采取高压手段镇压了抗议活动，恢复了对该村的控制，但该事件标志着后天安门时代人权捍卫运动的又一个里程碑。

The "Shaanbei oilfield litigation" is another high-profile case that demonstrates the potential of the rights defenders. After the Shaanxi provincial government seized oil wells operated by private investors in 2003 and provided only nominal compensation, activist lawyers and several liberal publications came to the defense of the private investors. Despite government intimidation and threats, a number of human rights lawyers represented the investors in their lawsuit against the provincial government. The incident produced an unwelcome spotlight on the party. Although the lawsuit ultimately failed, the act of confiscation of private property discredited the regime's pledge to respect private property rights.51

“陕北油田诉讼案”是另一起引人注目的案件，展现了人权捍卫者的潜力。2003年，陕西省政府没收了私人投资者经营的油井，仅给予象征性的补偿。此后，维权律师和一些自由派媒体挺身而出，为私人投资者辩护。尽管面临政府的恐吓和威胁，一些人权律师仍代表投资者对省政府提起诉讼。该事件使党陷入舆论漩涡。虽然诉讼最终败诉，但没收私人财产的行为使当局尊重私有财产权的承诺名誉扫地。

On occasion, rights defenders would score a rare victory, as in the case of Sun Dawu, a rural entrepreneur in Hebei province. In May 2003 Sun was arrested on charges of "illegal fund-raising." Prosecution of Sun was based on a broad and vague legal provision that effectively prohibited private entrepreneurs from raising private funds. Sensing an opportunity to defend the rights of private entrepreneurs, activist lawyers served as his defense counsel. With the support of liberal publications, the rights defenders created enormous public support for Sun and, at the same time, also discredited the government's charges against him. Ultimately, he received a suspended light sentence.52 (Sun later became an outspoken critic of the government. In 2022 the Xi regime sentenced him to eighteen years in prison on made-up charges.)

有时，维权人士会取得难得的胜利，例如河北省农村企业家孙大武的案例。2003年5月，孙大武因“非法集资”被捕。对他的起诉依据的是一项宽泛而模糊的法律条款，该条款实际上禁止私人企业家进行私人集资。维权律师们意识到这是一个捍卫私人企业家权利的机会，于是担任了他的辩护律师。在自由派媒体的支持下，维权人士为孙大武赢得了巨大的公众支持，同时也驳斥了政府对他的指控。最终，他被判处缓刑。（孙大武后来成为政府的公开批评者。2022年，习近平政权以捏造的罪名判处他18年有期徒刑。）

Judging by its measurable accomplishments, such as court victories, favorable administrative actions, and reversal of unjust government policies, the rights defense movement during the Hu era achieved only modest successes. But its accomplishments reveal several important aspects of state-society relations in that era. First, rapid economic progress in the post-Tiananmen era did create favorable socioeconomic conditions—in particular, an expansion of the middle class (represented by the human rights activists, liberal lawyers, and journalists in the rights defense movement) and access to new information technologies. These conditions enabled those grassroots champions of freedom and rule of law to mount a sustained, albeit unorganized, social movement to assert the rights of the Chinese people. Second, the party's attempt to burnish its image and promote economic growth with an ostensibly improved legal system opened up the legal arena as a contested space for advocates of human rights and rule of law to challenge the party and test its boundaries. Third, the rights defense movement was part of the growth of Chinese civil society and had the potential of becoming a more organized and coherent force for democratization, as demonstrated by the rise of the New Citizens Movement, a 2003 civic group founded by the civil rights lawyer Xu Zhiyong that attracted a diverse group of supporters and played a leading role in the rights defense movement until the government banned it in 2013.53 Finally, bottom-up pressures for liberalization without the support of the reformers within the regime could win small battles in some instances but were insufficient to promote systemic change. The absence of reformers in the top leadership of the party during the post-Tiananmen era made it impossible for this movement to realize its potential.

从可衡量的成就来看，例如法庭胜诉、有利的行政措施以及不公正政府政策的逆转，胡锦涛时代的维权运动仅取得了有限的成功。但其成就揭示了当时国家与社会关系的几个重要方面。首先，天安门事件后经济的快速发展确实创造了有利的社会经济条件——特别是中产阶级的壮大（维权运动中的人权活动家、自由派律师和记者便是其中的代表）以及对新兴信息技术的获取。这些条件使得这些草根自由和法治捍卫者能够发起一场持续的、尽管组织松散的社会运动，以维护中国人民的权利。其次，党试图通过表面上完善的法律体系来提升自身形象并促进经济增长，这使得法律领域成为人权和法治倡导者挑战党、试探其底线的斗争空间。第三，维权运动是中国公民社会发展的一部分，并有可能发展成为一股更有组织、更团结的民主化力量，新公民运动的兴起便证明了这一点。新公民运动是由维权律师许志永于2003年创立的公民团体，吸引了众多不同背景的支持者，并在维权运动中发挥了领导作用，直至2013年被政府取缔。最后，自下而上推动自由化的压力，若缺乏体制内改革者的支持，或许能在某些情况下取得一些小胜利，但不足以推动系统性变革。天安门事件后，党的领导层缺乏改革者，使得这场运动无法充分发挥其潜力。





Crony Capitalism and Corruption





裙带资本主义和腐败


Official corruption is widely thought to have become more pervasive in the post-Mao era and, in particular, the Hu era.54 During the Jiang period, China was typically ranked among the bottom third of the countries surveyed (although the number of countries surveyed was smaller than that in later periods). Corruption appeared to have abated modestly during the Hu period. China's ranking rose to the median of the countries surveyed, most probably because the surveys included more (and likely more corrupt) countries.55

人们普遍认为，官僚腐败在后毛泽东时代，尤其是在胡锦涛时代变得更加普遍。在江泽涛时期，中国在被调查国家的排名中通常位列后三分之一（尽管当时被调查的国家数量少于后来的时期）。胡锦涛时期，腐败现象似乎略有缓解。中国的排名上升到被调查国家的中位数，这很可能是因为调查涵盖了更多（也可能更腐败的）国家。

Even though the Corruption Perception Index may not help us ascertain whether corruption grew worse in the Hu era than it was in the Jiang era, it is possible to rely on another measure to gauge corruption. Official data on the prosecution of bribery cases disclosed in Zhongguo falü nianjian (Law yearbook of China) give us a more detailed picture of the intensity of corruption. We here include only bribery cases because China almost exclusively punishes bribe-takers who are party and government officials. Data on major bribery cases provide more convincing evidence that corruption intensified during this period (see table 4.7). The number of major bribery cases rose 6.7 times from 1998 to 2012, far outpacing the increase in the Consumer Price Index (1.4 times during the same period), indicating that inflation was a negligible factor in the dramatic increase in the number of major bribery cases.56

尽管廉政公署指数可能无法帮助我们确定胡锦涛时代的腐败程度是否比江泽民时代更严重，但我们可以通过其他指标来衡量腐败。中国法律年鉴披露的官方受贿案件起诉数据，为我们提供了更详细的腐败程度概览。此处我们仅列出受贿案件，因为中国几乎只惩处受贿的党政官员。重大受贿案件的数据更有力地证明了这一时期腐败的加剧（见表4.7）。1998年至2012年，重大受贿案件数量增长了6.7倍，远超同期消费者物价指数的涨幅（1.4倍），表明通货膨胀在重大受贿案件数量的急剧增长中几乎可以忽略不计。

Data on the number of officials at the county level and above prosecuted for corruption may give us a glimpse of the scope of official corruption, i.e., the number of officials implicated in corruption cases. The annual reports of

县级及以上官员因贪污被起诉人数的数据，可以让我们一窥官员贪污的规模，即卷入贪污案件的官员人数。年度报告显示，

TABLE 4.7.Number of Major Bribery Cases Prosecuted,1998-2012

表4.7.1998-2012年重大贿赂案件起诉数量

Note: Major bribery cases involve over 50,000 yuan.

注：重大贿赂案件涉及金额超过5万元人民币。

Source: Zhongguo faliu nianjian, various years (Beijing:Zhongguo falu nianjian chubanshe).

Source: Zhongguo faliu nianjian, various years (Beijing:Zhongguo falu nianjian chubanshe).



the Supreme People's Procuratorate (SPP) show that the scope of corruption by this measure has expanded dramatically since the late 1980s (see table 4.8). Particularly notable is the significant increase in the number of higher-ranking officials (bureau level and above). The data for the 2013-2017 period, Xi's first term, also show that his anticorruption campaign targeted far more higher-level officials than were targeted during previous periods, while lower-level officials (at the county level) were less affected. This may be interpreted as evidence of Xi's weaponization of anticorruption prosecution to destroy political rivals and consolidate power.57

最高人民检察院的数据显示，自20世纪80年代末以来，腐败的范围已显著扩大（见表4.8）。尤其值得注意的是，上级官员（局级及以上）的数量大幅增加。2013-2017年（习近平第一任期）的数据也显示，他的反腐运动针对的上级官员数量远超以往，而下级官员（县级）受到的影响较小。这或许可以被解读为习近平将反腐诉讼武器化，以打击政治对手、巩固权力的证据。

In addition to a measurable increase in the intensity and scope of corruption, corruption during the Hu era acquired characteristics normally associated with regime decay. Collusive corruption—cases involving multiple individuals—became widespread, as did the practice of bribing superiors for appointments and promotions. Government officials and businesspeople forged close relationships that allowed the latter to bribe the former for lucrative government contracts, cheap land, underpriced state assets, and bank loans.58

除了腐败的强度和范围显著增加外，胡锦涛时代的腐败还呈现出通常与政权衰落相关的特征。串通腐败——涉及多人的案件——变得普遍，贿赂上级以获取任命和晋升的做法也十分盛行。政府官员和商人建立了密切关系，使得后者能够贿赂前者，从而获得利润丰厚的政府合同、廉价土地、低价国有资产和银行贷款。

TABLE 4.8. Number of Officials Criminally Prosecuted

表 4.8. 被刑事起诉的官员人数

Source: "Work Report of the Supreme People's Procuratorate," https://www.spp.gov.cn/spp/gzbg/index.shtml.

来源：《最高人民检察院工作报告》，https://www.spp.gov.cn/spp/gzbg/index.shtml。



In retrospect, the intensification of corruption during the Hu era was the result of a convergence of several factors, most of which were embedded in the nature of the post-Tiananmen political economy. The ruling elites had abundant opportunities to abuse their political power to engage in rent-seeking or self-enriching activities.59 Despite the regime's unabashed endorsement of the pro-market reforms in the 1990s, the state continued to retain enormous influence over the economy. It owned large commercial entities with trillions of yuan in assets. In 2002 state-owned and state majority-controlled industrial firms held 8.9 trillion yuan in assets (nearly two-thirds of total industrial assets). By 2012, the end of the Hu era, the state-owned or state-controlled industrial assets in these firms reached 31.2 trillion yuan (about 41 percent of total industrial assets).60 Despite the relative decline in their share, SOEs still directly controlled enormous assets, creating plentiful opportunities for officials to convert their political power into illicit income. Aside from industrial assets, the state also monopolized land rights, which it could lease to private entrepreneurs for commercial development. Unsurprisingly, sweetheart deals between private developers and local officials turned real estate into one of the most corrupt sectors in China during the Hu era.61 China's government-funded infrastructure boom that began in the 1990s also spawned sector-wide corruption because local officials in charge of building highways could dole out contracts to construction companies in return for bribes. Between 1995 and 2014, seventeen directors of provincial transportation departments were arrested on charges of corruption. The vast amounts of bribes that they received necessitated severe punishment: One was executed, another received a suspended death sentence, and five were imprisoned for life.62

回顾历史，胡锦涛时代腐败的加剧是多种因素共同作用的结果，其中大部分因素都根植于天安门事件后的政治经济体制之中。统治精英拥有大量滥用政治权力的机会，从事寻租或中饱私囊的活动。尽管政权在20世纪90年代毫不掩饰地支持市场改革，但国家仍然对经济保持着巨大的影响力。国家拥有资产规模达数万亿元人民币的大型商业实体。2002年，国有及国有控股的工业企业资产总额达8.9万亿元人民币（几乎占工业总资产的三分之二）。到2012年胡锦涛时代末期，这些企业中国有或国有控股的工业资产达到31.2万亿元人民币（约占工业总资产的41%）。尽管其份额相对下降，但国有企业仍然直接控制着巨额资产，为官员将政治权力转化为非法收入提供了大量机会。除了工业资产，国家还垄断了土地使用权，并将其租赁给私人企业进行商业开发。不出所料，私人开发商与地方官员之间的利益输送使房地产在胡锦涛时代成为中国最腐败的行业之一。始于20世纪90年代的中国政府主导的基础设施建设热潮也滋生了行业腐败，因为负责修建高速公路的地方官员可以通过向建筑公司行贿来获得合同。1995年至2014年间，共有17名省级交通运输部门负责人因涉嫌腐败被捕。他们收受的贿赂数额巨大，因此必须受到严厉惩罚：一人被处决，一人被判处缓刑，五人被判处终身监禁。

The sectors singled out by China's top prosecutor for bribery investigations in 2008—infrastructure projects, sale of land rights, transfer of property rights (of SOEs), purchase and sale of medicine, government procurement, and development of natural resources—illustrate that state control of assets, regulatory approvals, and project financing are some of the root causes of corruption.63 Politically, two factors likely fueled official corruption in the post-Tiananmen era. First, the neo-authoritarian model of development that combines political repression with capitalism can make corruption more difficult to control because of the suppression of a civil society and the lack of press freedom. One of the most effective approaches to combatting official corruption is to rely on civil society and a free press to act as public watchdogs.64 However, the space for civil society in the post-Tiananmen era was extremely compressed due to the party's paranoia about the emergence of an organized opposition. The regime also maintained tight press censorship (although it would become even worse during the Xi era).

2008年，中国最高检察长重点调查的贿赂领域包括基础设施项目、土地权买卖、国有企业产权转移、药品买卖、政府采购和自然资源开发。这些领域表明，国家对资产的控制、监管审批和项目融资是腐败的根源之一。63 从政治角度来看，后天安门时代官员腐败的滋生可能有两个因素。首先，将政治压制与资本主义相结合的新威权发展模式，由于压制公民社会和缺乏新闻自由，使得腐败更难控制。打击官员腐败最有效的方法之一是依靠公民社会和自由媒体发挥公众监督作用。64 然而，由于党对有组织的反对派的出现感到恐惧，后天安门时代公民社会的空间受到了极大的压缩。该政权还维持着严格的新闻审查制度（尽管在习近平时代情况会变得更糟）。

Second, the party's primary approach to fighting corruption—waging periodic political campaigns—was largely ineffective. The sole bureaucratic organizations charged with the task, the party's own discipline inspection committees, lacked independence and were easily politicized.65 The effects of the anticorruption campaigns were short-lived also because the officials on the take would simply lie low during the campaigns and then resume stealing once the political heat had subsided.66 The fragile balance of factional power at the top levels of the leadership similarly constrained the party's ability to combat corruption because of the implicit mutual security pact among top leaders. No single leader was powerful enough to launch a sustained anticorruption drive that could potentially send his rivals and their followers to jail (as Xi did immediately after gaining power). Because the collective leadership in the post-Tiananmen era made decisions through consensus, prosecuting senior officials (those at or above the ministerial or provincial level) likely required unanimous agreement among the members of the Politburo or the PSC. This arrangement may explain why relatively few ministerial-level and provincial-level officials were prosecuted in the post-Tiananmen era and why the number jumped in the Xi era. Although the unspoken mutual security pact at the top of the regime probably helped maintain leadership cohesion and limited the weaponization of anticorruption investigations, it also made it more difficult to contain corruption.

其次，党的主要反腐手段——定期开展政治运动——在很大程度上收效甚微。唯一负责反腐的官僚机构，即党的纪律检查委员会，缺乏独立性，且极易被政治化。反腐运动的效果也往往昙花一现，因为贪污官员会在运动期间销声匿迹，待政治热度消退后便重操旧业。此外，高层领导之间派系权力的脆弱平衡也限制了党的反腐能力，因为高层领导人之间存在着隐性的相互安全协议。没有哪位领导人拥有足够的权力发起一场持续的反腐运动，从而有可能将自己的对手及其追随者送进监狱（就像习近平上台后立即采取的行动那样）。由于天安门事件后集体领导层通过协商一致的方式做出决策，因此对高级官员（部级或省级及以上官员）的起诉很可能需要政治局或国家政协成员的一致同意。这种安排或许可以解释为何天安门事件后被起诉的部级和省级官员相对较少，而习近平时代这一数字却大幅上升。尽管政权高层之间不成文的相互安全默契可能有助于维护领导层的凝聚力，并限制反腐调查被武器化，但也使得遏制腐败变得更加困难。

Even though corruption in the Hu era was widespread, it is difficult to calculate its economic costs. On the surface, the pervasive corruption did not lead to a slowdown of growth.67 But the economic costs of corruption were likely reflected in performance data that are not captured by growth. For instance, the costs of "white elephant" infrastructure projects and inflated prices of goods procured by the government actually boosted GDP growth because of the use of expenditures in growth accounting. Since goods and services tainted by corruption are typically of inferior quality, measuring the economic costs is methodologically difficult. Research on corruption nevertheless shows that most of its costs tend to be indirect and manifested in high income inequality, inadequate social services, poor food safety, environmental degradation, and social unrest—exactly the socioeconomic pathologies widely observed during the Hu era.68

尽管胡时代腐败盛行，但其经济成本难以估量。表面上看，普遍存在的腐败并未导致经济增长放缓。但腐败的经济成本很可能反映在经济增长无法捕捉到的绩效数据中。例如，政府采购的“面子工程”和价格虚高的商品，由于增长核算中采用了支出项，实际上推高了GDP增长。由于受腐败污染的商品和服务通常质量低劣，因此在方法论上难以衡量其经济成本。然而，对腐败的研究表明，其大部分成本往往是间接的，体现在收入不平等加剧、社会服务不足、食品安全问题严重、环境恶化和社会动荡等诸多方面——而这些恰恰是胡时代普遍存在的社会经济弊病。

Politically, endemic official corruption during the Hu era created favorable conditions for the return of a ruthless strongman such as Xi Jinping. As corruption permeated the regime and a large number of officials were tainted, they became easy targets for a potential strongman who could purge rivals and amass huge power under the guise of cleansing the party. This is precisely what occurred during Xi's first term.

胡锦涛时代根深蒂固的官僚腐败，为习近平这样一位冷酷无情的强人重返政坛创造了有利条件。随着腐败渗透到政权各个角落，大量官员身陷囹圄，他们很容易成为潜在强人的目标。这位强人可以借着“洗白党内”的幌子，清除异己，攫取巨大权力。这正是习近平第一任期内发生的情况。





The Beginning of the End of the Post-Tiananmen Order





天安门事件后秩序终结的开端


On the surface, the Hu era seems to be almost a seamless continuation of the Jiang period. With the exception of the purge of one Politburo member, Shanghai's party boss Chen Liangyu, elite politics was relatively stable. But trouble was brewing beneath the façade of elite unity. The two major factions—the "Shanghai Gang," led by the retired Jiang Zemin, and the "Youth League faction" (tuanpai), under the aegis of Hu Jintao—had no real ideological differences over policy as they both were committed adherents to Deng's neo-authoritarian vision. But at the same time they were fierce rivals for power over personnel appointments. This rivalry would peak in 2007 with the party selection of Hu's successor. The impasse between the two factions ended with the anointment of a dark horse, Xi Jinping—who was unaffiliated with either faction—as future party chief. This fateful decision would later change the course of history. The designation of Xi, however, did not completely settle the issue of succession. As Xi was seen as a potentially weak leader because he lacked his own power base, ambitious party apparatchiks, in particular Bo Xilai, who was promoted to the Politburo in 2007, began to maneuver for more power in the run-up to the leadership transition scheduled for late 2012. The ultimate outcome of Bo's power grab was a spectacular and sordid scandal that not only ended his political career but also put a fitting end to the two-decade-long post-Tiananmen era, fully exposing the rot and decay that had been accumulating beneath the ever-prospering economy.

表面上看，胡锦涛时代似乎是江泽民时代的无缝延续。除了上海市委书记陈良宇被清洗之外，精英政治相对稳定。然而，在精英团结的表象之下，暗流涌动。两大派系——以退休的江泽民为首的“上海帮”和以胡锦涛为首的“共青团派”——在政策上并无真正的意识形态分歧，因为他们都坚定地拥护邓小平的新威权主义理念。但与此同时，他们在人事任命上却展开了激烈的权力斗争。这种斗争在2007年党内选举胡锦涛的接班人时达到了顶峰。两大派系之间的僵局最终以一位黑马——习近平——被推举为未来的党总书记而告终。习近平当时既不属于任何派系，也不属于任何派系。这一具有决定性意义的决定，日后将改变历史的进程。然而，习近平的任命并未彻底解决权力交接问题。由于习近平缺乏自身权力基础，被视为潜在的软弱领导人，因此，野心勃勃的党内干部，尤其是2007年晋升为政治局委员的薄熙来，开始在2012年底的领导层换届前夕攫取更多权力。薄熙来最终的夺权行动以一场轰动一时、丑闻缠身的丑闻告终，这场丑闻不仅终结了他的政治生涯，也为长达二十年的后天安门时代画上了句号，彻底暴露了繁荣经济下暗流涌动的腐败和衰败。

The rivalry between the Shanghai Gang and the Youth League faction reached its peak ahead of the Seventeenth Party Congress in 2007, which was scheduled to select Hu's successor. The most widely circulated rumor is that in that year the deadlocked party leadership conducted an informal poll of more than four hundred top officials, and Xi came up on top of his rival, Li Keqiang, a former CYL leader and Hu's protégé.69 Xi was subsequently promoted to the Politburo Standing Committee in 2007 and was slated to succeed Hu in 2012. Li Keqiang, also elevated to the PSC, was ranked below Xi and would be the future premier.

上海帮和同盟党派之间的竞争在2007年召开的中共十七大前达到顶峰，当时正值选举胡锦涛接班人之际。流传最广的传言是，在当年陷入僵局的党领导层进行了一次针对四百多名高级官员的非正式民意调查，习近平胜过了他的竞争对手李克强——李克强曾是同盟党领导人，也是胡锦涛的门生。随后，习近平于2007年晋升为政治局常委，并被安排在2012年接替胡锦涛。同样晋升为政治局常委的李克强排名在习近平之后，并将成为未来的总理。

Although this version of the events of 2007 lacks documented evidence, several factors apparently converged to produce this surprise outcome. The most important factor in Xi's favor was that the Shanghai Gang could not put forward a competitive candidate. Chen Liangyu, a protégé of Jiang and former Shanghai party chief, might have been a plausible candidate even though he would be 61 in 2007, six years older than Xi, and he would be 66 if he were to succeed Hu in 2012. But he was purged by Hu on corruption charges in 2006, most likely as a preemptive move to clear the path to the top for Li Keqiang.70 With no candidate of its own, the strategic goal of the Shanghai Gang was to deny the Youth League faction the top prize, even if it had to consent to picking someone who was not part of its network.

尽管这种对2007年事件的描述缺乏确凿的证据，但显然有几个因素共同促成了这一出人意料的结果。对习近平有利的最重要因素是上海帮无法推出一位有竞争力的候选人。陈良宇是江泽民的门生，曾任上海市委书记，他原本可能是一位合适的候选人，尽管他在2007年时已61岁，比习近平年长6岁，如果他在2012年接替胡锦涛，则将年满66岁。但他在2006年被胡锦涛以腐败指控清洗，这很可能是为了先发制人，为李克强铺平通往权力顶峰的道路。由于自身没有候选人，上海帮的战略目标是阻止共青团派系赢得最高职位，即使这意味着他们必须同意选择一位不属于自己阵营的人。

In terms of his "princeling" family background and political career, Xi had no prior contact with the Shanghai Gang. But his political prospects brightened significantly on the eve of Jiang's retirement as party chief in 2002. Although Xi had spent seventeen years in Fujian province, climbing from the position of deputy mayor of Xiamen (in 1985) to Fujian's governor (in 2000), he had a lackluster record as an administrator.71 Nevertheless, Jiang gave Xi a critical career boost by making him party chief of Zhejiang in late 2002 and placing him in a favored position for promotion to the Politburo in 2007. Jiang's role in Xi's rise in 2002 indicates that he probably saw Xi as a potential ally despite his lack of ties with Jiang's Shanghai Gang.

就其“太子党”出身和政治生涯而言，习近平此前与上海帮并无任何联系。但2002年江泽民卸任中共中央总书记前夕，习近平的政治前景显著好转。尽管习近平曾在福建省工作十七年，从厦门市副市长（1985年）一路晋升至福建省省长（2000年），但他的行政政绩却乏善可陈。然而，江泽民在2002年底任命习近平为浙江省委书记，并为其在2007年晋升政治局委员铺平道路，这无疑为习近平的政治生涯注入了一剂强心针。江泽民在2002年习近平崛起过程中扮演的角色表明，尽管习近平与江泽民的上海帮并无关联，但江泽民可能仍将习近平视为潜在的盟友。

The inherent weakness of the Youth League faction in general, and the weak leadership of Hu Jintao in particular, further contributed to the faction's 2007 defeat in the succession struggle, to Xi's benefit. On paper, the Communist Youth League seems to be an impressive political organization. With more than 73 million members (in 2023) and branch organizations spanning the entire country, CYL officials are on a fast track to promotions in the party's organizational hierarchy.72 In the post-Mao era, two national leaders of the league, Hu Yaobang and Hu Jintao, became the party's general secretary. The third, Hu Qili, was made a PSC member and a future successor before he was dismissed after the Tiananmen crackdown.

共青团派系本身固有的弱点，尤其是胡锦涛领导能力的不足，进一步导致了该派系在2007年权力交接斗争中的失败，这对习近平有利。从表面上看，共青团似乎是一个令人印象深刻的政治组织。它拥有超过7300万名党员（2023年数据），分支机构遍布全国，共青团官员在党的组织架构中晋升迅速。在后毛泽东时代，共青团的两名全国性领导人胡耀邦和胡锦涛成为了中共中央总书记。第三位领导人胡其礼在天安门事件后被解职之前，曾被任命为国家政治保卫委员会委员，并被视为未来的接班人。

However, senior leaders promoted from the CYL have one glaring weakness. With the exception of Hu Yaobang, who climbed to the top of the CYL by starting as a local official in Sichuan, most league members who ascended to the top lacked local administrative experience as party chiefs. Typically, they began their political careers inside the CYL and then helicoptered to provincial governments to gain the requisite experience before they could be promoted to national-level leadership. This path to the top may have put some CYL officials on a faster track to the top than most CCP officials, but it also tended to produce weaker leaders.73 First, the CYL as an ancillary organization of the party does not have real administrative authority, so its leaders have few opportunities to gain executive experience at the local levels. When the lucky few are promoted to the top, they are untested and unproven leaders. Second, due to the status of the CYL as an ancillary organization of the party, the league has no say in the distribution of government resources, making it impossible for its officials to trade favors with local party officials or other elites or to build up their own networks. As a consequence, CYL stars such as Hu Qili, Hu Jintao, and Li Keqiang rose to the top mainly due to the support of powerful patrons. Hu Jintao, the only former head of the CYL to become CCP chief after the fall of Hu Yaobang, owed his good fortune to Deng Xiaoping, who designated him as Jiang's successor—an arrangement Jiang could not undo.

然而，从青年团晋升的高级领导人存在一个明显的弱点。除了胡耀邦——他从四川地方官员做起，最终登上青年团高层——之外，大多数从青年团晋升到高层的党政干部都缺乏地方行政经验。通常情况下，他们的政治生涯始于青年团内部，然后被“空投”到省级政府，积累必要的经验，才能晋升到国家级领导岗位。这种晋升路径或许使一些青年团官员比大多数中共官员更快地登上权力顶峰，但也往往造就了能力较弱的领导人。首先，青年团作为党的附属组织，没有真正的行政权力，因此其领导人很少有机会在地方层面积累行政经验。当少数幸运儿晋升到高层时，他们都是未经考验、能力未得到证明的领导人。其次，由于青年联盟是中共的附属组织，它在政府资源分配上没有发言权，其成员无法与地方党政官员或其他精英进行利益交换，也无法建立自己的关系网。因此，像胡其力、胡锦涛和李克强这样的青年联盟明星人物之所以能够晋升到高层，主要依靠的是权势人物的支持。胡锦涛是胡耀邦下台后唯一一位从青年联盟出身并最终成为中共中央总书记的人，他的成功要归功于邓小平，邓小平指定他为江泽民的接班人——江泽民无法推翻这一安排。

But when the party had to pick Hu's successor, the weakness of the CYL became evident. Its power could not match that of the Shanghai Gang, which was determined to prevent another former CYL leader from taking over the party's top post. Li Keqiang, the CYL candidate, appeared to be a clone of Hu. Like Hu, he had risen to the top of the CYL, and later he had helicoptered to Henan and Liaoning to burnish his credibility and experience. Also like Hu, Li was colorless and had no track record as a dynamic and capable leader. Furthermore, Li's patron was Hu Jintao, not Deng Xiaoping. Deng's support and authority ensured Hu's appointment as Jiang's successor, but in 2007 Hu had nowhere near the same amount of prestige and power as Deng had in 1992 to pick a successor.

但当党必须选出胡锦涛的接班人时，青年联盟的弱点就暴露无遗。它的实力无法与上海帮相提并论，后者决心阻止另一位青年联盟前领导人接任党的最高职位。青年联盟的候选人李克强，看起来就像是胡锦涛的翻版。和胡锦涛一样，他也曾是青年联盟的领导人，后来又乘直升机前往河南和辽宁，以提升自己的威望和经验。同样，李克强也缺乏个性，没有展现出领导才能和魄力的记录。此外，李克强的幕后支持者是胡锦涛，而不是邓小平。邓小平的支持和权威确保了胡锦涛被任命为江泽民的接班人，但在2007年，胡锦涛的威望和权力远不及邓小平在1992年时那样强大，难以挑选接班人。

Hu Jintao is commonly believed to be the weakest of all Chinese leaders in the post-Mao era.74 He had no close allies on the powerful PSC during his first term, and he could count on only one member (Li Keqiang) during his second term. By contrast, his predecessor Jiang, with at least four supporters on the PSC during Hu's decade in power, could constrain Hu's exercise of power.75 In retrospect, however much Hu might have wanted Li to be his heir, he lacked the clout to make it happen.

人们普遍认为，胡锦涛是后毛泽东时代中国领导人中最弱势的一位。在他第一个任期内，他在权力强大的国家安全委员会中没有亲密的盟友；第二个任期内，他也只能依靠一位委员（李克强）。相比之下，他的前任江泽民在胡锦涛执政的十年间，至少有四位委员支持他，足以制约胡锦涛的权力。事后看来，尽管胡锦涛可能非常希望李克强成为他的接班人，但他缺乏足够的权力来实现这一目标。

Even though the details of the succession struggle in 2007 may never be fully known, its outcome—the selection of Xi Jinping—would change China's trajectory decisively, and dramatically, after 2012. To be sure, before Xi was made Shanghai party chief in 2007 after the fall of Chen Liangyu, he was a plausible successor but not in the top tier. If it is indeed true that Hu Jintao's purge of Chen was intended to remove a potential obstacle to Li Keqiang, he achieved just the opposite: He actually paved the way for Xi to move to the front row. When the party was forced to pick a successor, the impasse between the Shanghai Gang and the Youth League faction resulted in an apparent compromise—a successor seen as unaffiliated with either group.

尽管2007年权力交接之争的细节或许永远无法完全揭晓，但其结果——习近平的当选——在2012年后彻底改变了中国的发展轨迹。诚然，在陈良宇下台后，习近平于2007年被任命为上海市委书记之前，他虽然是一位可能的接班人，但并非核心人物。如果胡锦涛清洗陈良宇的目的是为了清除李克强的潜在障碍，那么他实际上却适得其反：他为习近平跻身权力核心铺平了道路。当党被迫选择接班人时，上海帮和同盟派之间的僵局最终导致了一个表面上的妥协——一位被认为不属于任何一方的接班人。

After the Sixteenth Party Congress ended in November 2007, the struggle for power at the top only intensified. By that time, the influence of the Shanghai Gang was beginning to wane because its chief patron, Jiang Zemin, was 81 and had been in retirement for five years. His associates on the PSC were all expected to step down in 2012. In the meantime, Xi, the designated successor, was perceived to be a weak leader because he had no faction of his own. The political landscape at the top of the regime appeared to open up opportunities for ambitious apparatchiks to jockey for power in the post-Hu era.

2007年11月中共十六大闭幕后，高层权力斗争愈演愈烈。当时，“上海帮”的影响力开始减弱，因为其主要支持者江泽民已81岁高龄，退休五年。他在国家政治保卫委员会的同僚预计都将在2012年卸任。与此同时，作为指定接班人的习近平被认为软弱无能，因为他没有自己的派系。后胡锦涛时代，政权高层的政治格局似乎为野心勃勃的官僚们提供了争夺权力的机会。

As with other power struggles in dictatorships, the political maneuvering during Hu's second term is shrouded in secrecy and spiced up with unsubstantiated rumors. But two characters feature prominently during this period. The first and most well-known is Bo Xilai, another princeling and newly promoted member of the Politburo and party chief of Chongqing. The second and more obscure figure is Ling Jihua, the director of the powerful General Office of the Central Committee and Hu's long-serving chief of staff. The salacious allegations about Ling's machinations are impossible to verify,76 but because he is one of the four "biggest tigers" (senior officials) whom Xi arrested at the height of his anticorruption campaign, it is reasonable to believe that Xi saw Ling as a lethal threat.

如同其他独裁政权的权力斗争一样，胡锦涛第二任期内的政治角力也笼罩在神秘的面纱之下，充斥着未经证实的谣言。但有两个人物在这一时期尤为突出。第一个也是最广为人知的是薄熙来，他也是一位“太子党”，刚刚晋升为政治局委员，并担任重庆市委书记。第二个人物则较为隐晦，他是中央办公厅主任，也是胡锦涛的长期幕僚长。关于凌继华幕后操纵的种种传闻无从考证，但由于他是习近平反腐运动高峰期逮捕的四大“老虎”（高级官员）之一，因此有理由相信，习近平将凌继华视为致命威胁。

By comparison, the scandal involving Bo Xilai and his family is well-known. The most revealing part of Bo's saga, for the purpose of understanding elite politics during the second half of Hu's rule, is not Bo's spectacular fall in early 2012 or the sleazy details of the corruption in his family, but his attention-grabbing antics to brand himself as a new type of leader during his tenure as Chongqing's party chief.

相比之下，薄熙来及其家族的丑闻早已广为人知。就理解胡锦涛执政后半期精英政治而言，薄熙来事件中最具启发性的部分并非他2012年初的轰然倒台，也并非他家族腐败的种种丑闻细节，而是他在担任重庆市委书记期间，为了将自己塑造成新型领导人而采取的种种引人注目的举动。

Almost as soon as Bo Xilai became Chongqing's party chief in late 2002, he embarked on a risky strategy of promoting himself as a future member of the PSC (mainly because the top two slots—the party chief and the premier—had already been assigned to Xi and Li Keqiang). Unlike Xi, who had shunned the limelight so he would not be seen as an ambitious and potentially dangerous leader, Bo gambled that his only path to the party's most powerful body was to market himself as a more dynamic and creative leader, far different from the risk-averse and colorless apparatchiks who had made up the overwhelming majority of the party's senior echelons in the post-Tiananmen era.

薄熙来在2002年底就任重庆市委书记后不久，便开始实施一项冒险策略，力图将自己塑造成未来国家常委委员（主要是因为中共中央总书记和国务院总理这两个最高职位当时已分别由习近平和李克强占据）。与习近平不同，习近平为了避免被视为野心勃勃且可能构成威胁的领导人而刻意保持低调，而薄熙来则赌上了自己的地位，认为通往党内最高权力机构的唯一途径就是把自己包装成一个更具活力和创造力的领导人，与后天安门时代占据中共高层绝大多数的那些保守乏味、缺乏个性的官僚截然不同。

Bo's campaign consisted of two tracks, both with a populist touch. Ideologically, he revived Maoist symbols with a campaign of "singing red" by organizing mass performances of revolutionary songs popular during the Maoist era. Given his family's suffering under Mao, Bo might not have been a real Maoist. But he apparently calculated that invoking Maoist symbols would resonate with a population concerned about high socioeconomic inequalities and rampant materialism. As no other senior apparatchiks dared to flaunt Maoist symbols, Bo's strategy succeeded in attracting enormous publicity and made him into an instant political star. Simultaneously, Bo launched a ferocious crackdown on alleged "organized crime" (dahei, literally smashing black). This drive led to the arrest and execution of local officials and private businesspeople accused of "organized crime." He dramatically expanded the police force as part of his "Safe Chongqing" campaign. This combination of Maoist ideological revival and cultivation of a public image as a strongman made Bo a popular figure among the local population.77 But Bo's unabashed campaign of self-promotion also earned him many enemies. Liberal scholars and private entrepreneurs saw him as a dangerous ultra-leftist. His rivals in the party were alarmed by the prospect of having this ambitious and ruthless man as one of the top leaders in the post-Hu era.

薄熙来的竞选活动包含两条路线，都带有明显的民粹主义色彩。在意识形态上，他通过组织群众演唱毛泽东时代流行的革命歌曲，发起了一场“唱红歌”运动，复兴了毛泽东时代的象征符号。考虑到他的家庭在毛泽东统治时期遭受的苦难，薄熙来或许并非真正的毛派。但他显然认为，援引毛泽东的象征符号能够引起民众的共鸣，因为民众普遍关注着严重的社会经济不平等和泛滥的物质主义。由于其他高级官员不敢公开使用毛泽东的象征符号，薄熙来的策略成功地吸引了大量公众的关注，使他迅速成为政治明星。与此同时，薄熙来对所谓的“大黑”进行了猛烈的打击。这场运动导致许多被指控“大黑”的地方官员和私营企业主遭到逮捕和处决。作为“安全重庆”运动的一部分，他还大幅扩充了警力。这种毛泽东思想复兴与强人形象塑造相结合的策略，使薄熙来在当地民众中颇受欢迎。但薄熙来毫不掩饰的自我宣传也为他树敌众多。自由派学者和私营企业家视他为危险的极左分子。党内对手则对后胡锦涛时代可能出现这样一位野心勃勃、冷酷无情的领导人感到担忧。

The most remarkable—and revealing—aspect of Bo's attempted power grab before his fall in March 2012 is that he almost succeeded. During his campaign of "singing red and smashing black," not a single senior leader dared to criticize him. Nearly all members of the PSC, including Xi, visited Chongqing as an endorsement of Bo's "Chongqing model." Only Hu and Wen did not go to Chongqing. Bo might have secured one of the seats on the PSC at the Eighteenth Party Congress in November 2012 if his police chief, Wang Lijun, had not exposed the murder of a British businessman by Bo's wife in November 2011.78

薄熙来在2012年3月倒台前试图夺权，其最引人注目——也最具启发性——之处在于他几乎成功了。在他“唱红打黑”的竞选活动中，没有一位高级领导人敢于批评他。几乎所有国家安全委员会成员，包括习近平，都访问了重庆，以示对薄熙来“重庆模式”的支持。只有胡锦涛和温家宝没有去重庆。如果不是他的公安总长王力军在2011年11月揭露了薄熙来的妻子谋杀一名英国商人的罪行，薄熙来或许能在2012年11月的中共十八大上获得一个国家安全委员会的席位。

In retrospect, the greatest beneficiary of Bo's political demise was Xi (who allegedly played a crucial role in urging the PSC to pursue a thorough investigation of Wang Lijun in hopes of implicating Bo).79 Had Bo been promoted to the PSC in fall 2012, he would have made a formidable rival to Xi, likely complicating the latter's efforts to consolidate power. Ironically, although Xi sent Bo to prison for life in August 2013, he has copied the tactics Bo had used in building up his authority and image in Chongqing. Instead of an anticrime drive, Xi launched a wide-ranging crackdown on corruption to destroy political rivals and amass power. Ideologically, Xi went even further than "singing red"—he launched a comprehensive movement of orthodox ideological indoctrination to return the party, which he believed had become too corrupted by materialism, to its revolutionary roots.

回顾历史，薄熙来政治生涯的终结，最大的受益者无疑是习近平（据称，习近平在敦促国家常委对王立军进行彻底调查，以期牵连薄熙来方面发挥了关键作用）。如果薄熙来在2012年秋季晋升为国家常委，他将成为习近平的强劲对手，很可能阻碍习近平巩固权力的努力。具有讽刺意味的是，尽管习近平在2013年8月将薄熙来判处无期徒刑，但他却效仿了薄熙来在重庆建立权威和形象的策略。习近平没有开展反犯罪运动，而是发起了一场范围广泛的反腐运动，旨在铲除政治对手，巩固自身权力。在意识形态方面，习近平的行动甚至超越了“唱红”——他发起了一场全面的正统意识形态灌输运动，试图让党——他认为该党已经过度腐败于物质主义——回归革命根基。





Fatal Flaws of Dengism





邓小平主义的致命缺陷


The fall of Bo Xilai is a fitting coda of the post-Tiananmen political order. By the time the once-swaggering princeling was brought down by his own hubris and political enemies, the foundations of the neo-authoritarian order, envisioned by Deng and constructed during the Jiang era, had begun to crack. Elite unity was fraying as power struggles assumed an increasingly vicious nature. The fragile balance of power was on the verge of collapse as the Shanghai Gang was losing influence due to the advanced age of its principal patron, Jiang Zemin, while the Youth League faction lacked the strength to become an effective countervailing force. A new generation of politicians unaffiliated with either faction, such as Xi and many others, was poised to rise to the top and to fundamentally reshape the elite landscape. Because of the unsustainable investment-driven growth model and the lack of economic reforms during the Hu era, the economy was beginning to lose steam, threatening to undercut the party's claim to performance legitimacy. If the incidence of mass protests is a measurement, tensions between the state and society were greater than at any time since the Tiananmen crackdown. Co-optation of elites might have secured some support from wealthy private businesspeople, but at the price of rampant corruption as ruling elites and well-connected entrepreneurs forged a self-serving alliance. Chinese leaders also appeared to have abandoned Deng's dictum of "keeping a low profile" on foreign policy as they began to flex their muscles abroad in the belief that their moment in the sun had arrived. The only pillars of the post-Tiananmen order that remained intact were the party's security apparatus, now equipped with the most advanced surveillance technologies, and Chinese nationalism.

薄熙来的倒台恰好为后天安门时代的政治秩序画上了一个句号。这位曾经趾高气扬的“太子党”最终因自身的傲慢和政敌的攻击而下台，此时，邓小平构想、江泽民时代构建的新威权秩序的根基已开始动摇。随着权力斗争愈演愈烈，精英阶层的团结日渐瓦解。由于其主要支持者江泽民年事已高，上海帮的影响力日渐式微；而同盟派又缺乏有效制衡的力量，脆弱的权力平衡岌岌可危。以习近平等为代表的新一代政治人物，不隶属于任何派系，正蓄势待发，准备从根本上重塑精英格局。由于胡锦涛时代不可持续的投资驱动型增长模式和经济改革的缺失，经济增长开始放缓，这威胁到党的政绩合法性。如果以大规模抗议活动的发生频率作为衡量标准，那么国家与社会之间的紧张关系达到了自天安门事件以来的最高点。对精英阶层的收买或许能获得一些富裕私营企业主的支持，但代价却是腐败横行，因为统治精英和关系密切的企业家们结成了一个自私自利的联盟。中国领导人似乎也放弃了邓小平关于外交政策“保持低调”的原则，开始在海外炫耀武力，认为他们的时代已经来临。后天安门时代秩序中唯一保持完好的支柱只有党的安保机构（如今配备了最先进的监控技术）和中国民族主义。

To be sure, the post-Tiananmen order could conceivably have lasted longer if Li Keqiang, instead of Xi Jinping, had become party chief in November 2012. It was Xi who demolished the post-Tiananmen order. Before the rise of a neostalinist figure like Xi, few would have imagined that Hu's successor could reverse Deng's policy of reform and opening and reimpose totalitarian control on the party and on a Chinese society that had been so thoroughly transformed by two decades of economic modernization.

诚然，如果2012年11月接任中共中央总书记的是李克强而非习近平，那么天安门事件后的秩序或许能够维持更久。正是习近平摧毁了天安门事件后的秩序。在习近平这样一位新斯大林主义人物崛起之前，几乎没有人会想到胡锦涛的继任者会推翻邓小平的改革开放政策，重新对党和中国社会实施极权统治——而中国社会此前已经历了二十年的经济现代化进程，发生了翻天覆地的变化。

In retrospect, Xi's speedy dismantling of the post-Tiananmen order—without much resistance in the party to boot—suggests that forces larger than the ambitions and ideological visions of a princeling were at work. In other words, the post-Tiananmen order contained the seeds of its own destruction. Under Xi, it came to a quick and abrupt end. Had a different leader succeeded Hu, the decaying order might have experienced a slower death, but it would nevertheless have met its end.

回望过去，习近平迅速瓦解天安门事件后的秩序——而且党内几乎没有遇到任何阻力——表明，其背后存在着比一位太子党的野心和意识形态愿景更为强大的力量。换言之，天安门事件后的秩序本身就蕴含着自我毁灭的种子。在习近平的领导下，它迅速而突然地走向终结。如果胡锦涛之后是另一位领导人，这个摇摇欲坠的秩序或许会经历一个更为缓慢的消亡过程，但最终也难逃覆灭的命运。

Like other dictatorships, the party in the post-Tiananmen era could not evade the law of negative selection: Its power and privileges mainly attracted opportunists who embraced the regime for personal gain, not out of genuine ideological commitment. As patronage and corruption became the principal means to get ahead in the regime, only apparatchiks with fewer scruples had a better chance to gain power, thus creating a dynamic of bad money driving out good money. Over time, less capable but more venal and sycphantic apparatchiks came to dominate the ranks of the regime. Institutionally, the degeneration of elites created favorable conditions for the rise of a ruthless personalistic ruler because they were too compromised by their record of corruption or too cowardly to put up a fight.80

与其他独裁政权一样，后天安门时代的党也无法逃脱负面选择规律：其权力和特权主要吸引的是那些为谋取私利而拥护政权的投机分子，而非出于真正的意识形态认同。随着裙带关系和腐败成为在政权中晋升的主要手段，只有那些道德底线更低的官僚才更有可能获得权力，从而造成了“坏钱赶好钱”的局面。随着时间的推移，能力较弱但更加贪婪谄媚的官僚逐渐主导了政权。从制度层面来看，精英阶层的堕落为冷酷无情的个人统治者的崛起创造了有利条件，因为他们要么因自身的腐败记录而声名狼藉，要么因为懦弱而不敢反抗。

The post-Tiananmen order unraveled also because of the inherent limitations of Deng's neo-authoritarian model. Transition from a centrally planned economy to a market economy under a Leninist regime faces impossible odds because such a transition will necessitate a near-total withdrawal of the state from the economy, fatally weakening a Leninist party-state's control of the economy. It is worth recalling that market reform was Deng's tactic to save the party, not his ultimate goal. As a pragmatic Leninist, he embraced capitalism out of necessity, not out of ideological conviction.

天安门事件后的社会秩序瓦解，也源于邓小平新威权主义模式的固有局限性。在列宁主义政权下，从计划经济向市场经济转型几乎不可能成功，因为这种转型需要国家几乎完全退出经济领域，从而从根本上削弱列宁主义党国对经济的控制。值得注意的是，市场改革是邓小平挽救党的策略，而非其最终目标。作为一个务实的列宁主义者，他拥抱资本主义是出于无奈，而非出于意识形态的信念。

Toward the end of the Hu era, however, the logic of a "partial reform equilibrium" set in. The remarkable economic achievements after the Tiananmen debacle, likely unanticipated by the regime (or anyone else, for that matter), boosted the party's legitimacy and confidence but also perversely diminished incentives to carry out further reforms.81 The most insidious aspect of a "partial reform equilibrium" is that this status quo offered maximum benefits to the party if it could be preserved. As a partially reformed economy was far more efficient than a centrally planned economy, the party could claim a higher degree of performance legitimacy. At the same time, this equilibrium also allowed the party to maintain a substantial degree of control over the economy and enabled the ruling elites to wield their political influence to extract personal benefits. Consequently, the regime had no desire either to return to a Maoist system or to advance to a full market system. But a "partial reform equilibrium" cannot be sustained forever. The combination of corruption and systemic inefficiency in the partial reform economy began to sap China's economic dynamism on the eve of Xi's takeover.

然而，在胡锦涛时代末期，“部分改革均衡”的逻辑开始形成。天安门事件后取得的显著经济成就，很可能是政权（或者任何人）始料未及的，这提升了党的合法性和自信心，但也适得其反地削弱了进一步改革的动力。“部分改革均衡”最阴险之处在于，如果能够维持现状，就能为党带来最大利益。由于部分改革后的经济效率远高于中央计划经济，党可以宣称其政绩具有更高的合法性。与此同时，这种均衡也使党能够对经济保持相当程度的控制，并使统治精英能够利用其政治影响力谋取私利。因此，政权既不愿回到毛泽东时代的体制，也不愿过渡到完全的市场经济体制。但是，“部分改革均衡”不可能永远维持下去。在习近平接任国家主席前夕，腐败和部分改革经济体制效率低下的问题开始削弱中国的经济活力。

The growth of private wealth, expansion of a middle class, and emergence of a nascent civil society constituted yet another existential threat to the post-Tiananmen order. Although the party had invested massive resources in surveillance and had acquired an unprecedented coercive capacity toward the end of the Hu era, it also began to encounter more direct and well-organized challenges to its authority from many directions—ethnic minorities in Tibet (which in 2008 experienced the region's most violent uprising in two decades) and Xinjiang (which saw China's most deadly ethnic riot in July 2009), underground religious and cult groups, human rights activists, environmental movements, and ordinary people victimized by government policies and abusive officials. Despite the regime's formidable capacity to quell these challenges, it would have to resort to more brutal tactics to deter and suppress societal opposition forces.

私人财富的增长、中产阶级的壮大以及新兴公民社会的出现，对后天安门时代的秩序构成了又一生存威胁。尽管中共在胡锦涛时代末期投入巨资加强监控，并获得了前所未有的强制力，但它也开始面临来自多方面的、更加直接且组织严密的挑战——西藏（2008年爆发了该地区二十年来最激烈的起义）和新疆（2009年7月爆发了中国历史上最致命的民族骚乱）的少数民族、地下宗教和邪教组织、人权活动人士、环保运动以及受政府政策和官员滥用职权迫害的普通民众。尽管中共政权拥有强大的镇压能力，但它不得不诉诸更加残酷的手段来威慑和镇压社会反对力量。

On the external front, the durability of the post-Tiananmen order critically depended on stable and largely cooperative relations with the West, its primary source of technology, market access, and capital. The strategic restraint urged by Deng served China well. However, there were two fundamental flaws in Deng's "hide and bide" strategy. First, ideological hostility toward the West's capitalist democracy was deeply embedded in the party, which saw the US-led West as an existential political threat and its economic engagement with China simply as an instrument of "peaceful evolution" or regime change. Such insecurity, if not paranoia, limited the extent of the West's economic engagement with China because China would prioritize regime security over economic benefits, and the West would understandably erect safeguards against a potential geopolitical adversary that was rapidly gaining strength through globalization. Second, China's rapid growth in the post-Tiananmen era radically transformed the global balance of power and changed its leaders' strategic calculus. When Deng prescribed strategic restraint in the wake of the Soviet collapse, it was not so much a stroke of geopolitical genius as a concession to reality: China was simply too weak to be assertive. All this would change toward the end of the Hu era. Finally, due to its growing power, China felt confident enough to take steps to extend its global influence, even at the risk of antagonizing the West, particularly the United States. Xi Jinping would later adopt a far more systematic and aggressive foreign policy, but China's strategic overreach actually began under the leadership of Hu Jintao.82

在对外层面，后天安门时代秩序的持久性关键在于与西方保持稳定且基本合作的关系，因为西方是中国技术、市场准入和资本的主要来源。邓小平倡导的战略克制对中国大有裨益。然而，邓小平的“观望”战略存在两个根本缺陷。首先，对西方资本主义民主的意识形态敌意根深蒂固于党内，党将以美国为首的西方视为生存的政治威胁，并将西方与中国的经济往来仅仅视为“和平演进”或政权更迭的工具。这种不安全感，甚至可以说是偏执，限制了西方与中国的经济往来程度，因为中国会优先考虑政权安全而非经济利益，而西方自然会建立起防范机制，以应对一个通过全球化迅速崛起的潜在地缘政治对手。其次，后天安门时代中国的快速发展从根本上改变了全球力量平衡，也改变了中国领导人的战略考量。邓小平在苏联解体后提出的战略克制，与其说是地缘政治上的天才之举，不如说是对现实的妥协：当时的中国实力太弱，无力采取强硬姿态。这一切在胡锦涛时代末期发生了改变。最终，由于国力日益增强，中国自信地采取措施扩大其全球影响力，即便冒着激怒西方，特别是美国的风险。习近平后来采取了更为系统和激进的外交政策，但中国的战略扩张实际上始于胡锦涛的领导时期。





5 China's Economic Miracle





5中国的经济奇迹


BASED ON CHINA's rapid growth in the post-Tiananmen era, it is tempting to think that this was primarily due to the party's neo-authoritarian development model. But such a conclusion is at most just partly correct because many other factors likely played a greater role in supercharging economic growth in the two decades following Deng Xiaoping's southern tour in early 1992.1 Certainly, the party's single-minded focus on economic development gave rise to an incentive structure that motivated local officials to prioritize growth. Reforms carried out in the 1990s helped lay some of the critical institutional foundations of a market economy. Additionally, the Chinese state's unrivaled capacity for mobilizing resources enabled the country to invest in physical capital, such as factories and infrastructure, on an unprecedented scale. However, a closer look at the underlying drivers of sustained economic growth in the post-Tiananmen era makes it clear that the most important foundations had actually been laid in the 1980s. A dynamic private sector that would evolve into the most powerful and efficient productive force in the post-Tiananmen era was created in the 1980s. The opening to the outside world, another critical step taken in the 1980s, allowed China to capitalize on the globalization boom in the post-Cold War era. The highly favorable demographic structure enabled China to benefit from an abundant supply of young workers and a low old-age dependency ratio. Cooperative relations with the West helped China gain support for accession to the World Trade Organization and become a trading superpower.

基于中国在天安门事件后的快速增长，人们很容易认为这主要归功于中共的新威权主义发展模式。但这种结论至多只能说是部分正确，因为在邓小平1992年初南巡后的二十年里，许多其他因素可能在推动经济增长方面发挥了更大的作用。诚然，中共对经济发展的专注催生了一种激励机制，促使地方官员优先考虑经济增长。20世纪90年代的改革也为市场经济奠定了一些关键的制度基础。此外，中国政府无与伦比的资源调动能力使其能够以前所未有的规模投资于工厂和基础设施等物质资本。然而，仔细审视天安门事件后持续经济增长的根本驱动因素，就会发现最重要的基础实际上早在20世纪80年代就已经奠定。上世纪80年代，中国创建了一个充满活力的私营部门，并在后天安门时代发展成为最强大、最高效的生产力。80年代的另一项关键举措是对外开放，这使中国得以充分利用后冷战时代的全球化浪潮。优越的人口结构使中国拥有充足的年轻劳动力和较低的老年抚养比。与西方国家的合作关系帮助中国获得了加入世界贸易组织的支持，并最终成为贸易超级大国。

Unfortunately, favorable economic and geopolitical factors seldom last forever. China's post-Tiananmen economic miracle conceivably could have become even more spectacular and endure longer had its leaders undertake more radical reforms to complete the country's march to a full market economy. Yet, the logic of path dependence again precluded this possibility. Instead of taking advantage of favorable structural factors to implement the difficult reforms, the party in the Hu Jintao era was trapped in a "partial reform equilibrium." The hybrid economy that emerged in the 1980s turned out to be far more difficult to reform. Strong economic performance reduced the party's incentive to risk tougher reforms. Its choice of an investment-driven development model became an addiction despite evidence of its diminishing returns in the Hu era. Further reduction of the state's influence over the market, especially through the privatization of state-owned enterprises, was politically unthinkable because the party saw them as the economic foundations of its monopoly of power. When China's economic momentum began to decelerate in the second half of Hu's decade in power, the party took the easy way out. Instead of painful structural reforms, it turned to credit-funded stimulus and blew an epic investment bubble that would burst and mire the economy in stagnation a dozen years later. In retrospect, party supremacy over market—the sine qua non of Dengism and the ultimate destiny of neo-authoritarian developmentalism—meant that the party would not permit considerations of economic efficiency to subvert its goal of regime survival. In this light, China's economic miracle in the post-Tiananmen era could not last.

不幸的是，有利的经济和地缘政治因素很少能永远持续下去。如果中国领导人能够进行更彻底的改革，完成向全面市场经济的转型，那么天安门事件后中国的经济奇迹或许会更加辉煌，持续时间也会更长。然而，路径依赖的逻辑再次排除了这种可能性。胡锦涛时代的党没有利用有利的结构性因素来推行艰难的改革，而是陷入了“局部改革均衡”的困境。20世纪80年代出现的混合经济模式被证明更难改革。强劲的经济表现降低了党进行更深入改革的动力。尽管胡锦涛时代已经出现了收益递减的迹象，但党仍然选择投资驱动型发展模式，并对此深恶痛绝。进一步削弱国家对市场的影响，特别是通过国有企业私有化，在政治上是不可想象的，因为党认为这些企业是其垄断权力的经济基础。在胡锦涛执政的后半段，中国经济增速开始放缓，中共选择了最简单的应对方式。它没有进行痛苦的结构性改革，而是转向信贷刺激，吹起了巨大的投资泡沫，最终泡沫破裂，导致经济在十几年后陷入停滞。事后看来，党凌驾于市场之上——这是邓小平主义的必要条件，也是新威权发展主义的最终归宿——意味着中共不会允许经济效率的考量影响其政权生存的目标。由此看来，后天安门时代中国的经济奇迹注定无法持久。





Economic Achievements





经济成就


Judging by measurable data, China's economic performance from the time between Deng's historic southern tour in 1992 and the end of Hu Jintao's rule in 2012 was among the most impressive in the annals of development. Although the quality of Chinese growth is marred by extensive environmental degradation, high income inequality, and rampant corruption, its quantitative achievements are undeniable. Factoring in the economic accomplishments of the 1980s, China transformed itself from an impoverished agrarian society to a moderately prosperous one within one generation. The main driver of this economic revolution was sustained growth in the post-Tiananmen period (table 5.1). During the two "miracle decades" (1993-2012), the Chinese economy grew at an annualized rate of 10.2 percent. The size of the Chinese economy in 2012 was nearly twenty times larger than that in 1992 in dollar terms (from $0.427 trillion to $8.53 trillion) and ten times larger in purchasing power parity (PPP) (from 1.47 trillion to 15.12 trillion).2

从可量化的数据来看，从邓小平1992年历史性的南巡到胡锦涛2012年卸任，中国的经济表现堪称发展史上最令人瞩目的成就之一。尽管中国经济增长的质量受到严重的环境恶化、收入不平等和腐败猖獗等问题的制约，但其量化成就毋庸置疑。考虑到20世纪80年代的经济成就，中国在一代人的时间内就从一个贫困的农业社会转型为小康社会。这一经济革命的主要驱动力是天安门事件后持续增长的时期（表5.1）。在两个“奇迹十年”（1993-2012年）期间，中国经济年均增长率达到10.2%。 2012年中国经济规模按美元计算几乎是1992年的20倍（从0.427万亿美元增至8.53万亿美元），按购买力平价（PPP）计算则是1992年的10倍（从1.47万亿美元增至15.12万亿美元）。

During this period, China also became a foreign trade powerhouse. The volume of exports rose more than elevenfold, and imports increased by the same order of magnitude (table 5.2). The explosive growth of Chinese foreign trade turned the country into the world's largest exporting economy within the two decades after the end of the Cold War. In 1992 China's share of global exports of goods (including Hong Kong) was 5.2 percent, placing it behind the United States, Germany, Japan, and France as the world's fifth-largest exporter. By 2012, China's share of global exports of goods (including Hong Kong) reached 13.9 percent, making it the world's largest exporter (a position it continued to hold in the mid-2020s).3 As a result of government support, Chinese exports included a large share of electronics and manufactured goods that were technologically more sophisticated than those of other economies at a comparable income level.4 Burgeoning exports filled China's foreign exchange coffers to the brim. In 1992 the country had only $19 billion in hard currency reserves. Two decades later, it boasted the world's largest foreign exchange reserves ($3.3 trillion).5

在此期间，中国也成为外贸强国。出口额增长超过11倍，进口额也增长了10倍（表5.2）。冷战结束后的二十年内，中国外贸的爆炸式增长使其成为世界最大的出口经济体。1992年，中国（包括香港）在全球商品出口中所占份额为5.2%，位列美国、德国、日本和法国之后，成为世界第五大出口国。到2012年，中国（包括香港）在全球商品出口中所占份额达到13.9%，成为世界最大的商品出口国（这一地位在2020年代中期仍然保持）。由于政府的支持，中国出口产品中电子产品和制成品的占比很高，这些产品的技术水平高于其他收入水平相当的经济体。蓬勃发展的出口使中国的外汇储备迅速增长。1992年，中国的外汇储备仅为190亿美元。二十年后，中国拥有了世界最大的外汇储备（3.3万亿美元）。

TABLE 5.1.GDP Growth, 1993-2012

表5.1. 1993-2012年GDP增长率

Source: Calculated from data in ZGTJNJ 2013, e-book, https://www.stats.gov.cn/sj/ndsj/.

来源：根据《2013年中国国家统计局数据统计报告》电子书计算得出，网址：https://www.stats.gov.cn/sj/ndsj/。



TABLE 5.2. Foreign Trade (in billion USD)

表 5.2. 对外贸易（单位：十亿美元）

Source: Calculated from data in ZGTJNJ 2013, e-book.

来源：根据 ZGTJNJ 2013 年电子书中的数据计算得出。





Economic growth in the post-Tiananmen period also urbanized a predominantly rural society. In 1992 only 27.5 percent (or 322 million) of the population lived in urban areas. By 2012, 52.6 percent (or 712 million) of the population were urban residents.6 The structure of the economy was transformed beyond recognition as the modern sectors (industry and services) dominated economic activities by 2012. In 1992 agriculture, industry, and services accounted for 21.8, 43.5, and 34.8 percent of GDP, respectively. By 2012, the share of agriculture had declined to 10.1 percent, while the shares of industry and services were 45.3 and 44.5 percent, respectively.7

天安门事件后的经济增长也推动了以农村为主的社会城市化进程。1992年，仅有27.5%（即3.22亿）的人口居住在城镇地区。到2012年，城镇人口比例上升至52.6%（即7.12亿）。经济结构也发生了翻天覆地的变化，现代产业（工业和服务业）在2012年主导了经济活动。1992年，农业、工业和服务业分别占GDP的21.8%、43.5%和34.8%。到2012年，农业占GDP的比重下降至10.1%，而工业和服务业的比重分别达到45.3%和44.5%。

The standard of living for the average Chinese rose from 1,262 in PPP in 1992 to 11,169 in PPP in 2012, a nearly tenfold improvement.8 Due to sustained high growth, the scale of the reduction in poverty during this period was unprecedented. On the eve of Deng's reform and opening, China had 770 million people living in poverty, of whom 658 million were living in rural areas. By 2013, the number of rural poor had fallen to 82 million (8.5 percent of the rural population). In other words, economic growth reduced the number of rural poor by 576 million between 1990 and 2013.9

1992年至2012年间，中国人均生活水平（按购买力平价计算）从1262提高到11169，增长了近十倍。由于经济持续高速增长，这一时期减贫规模空前。邓小平改革开放前夕，中国有7.7亿贫困人口，其中6.58亿生活在农村地区。到2013年，农村贫困人口减少到8200万（占农村人口的8.5%）。换言之，1990年至2013年间，经济增长使农村贫困人口减少了5.76亿。





Economic Reform and the Chinese Miracle





经济改革与中国奇迹


The post-Tiananmen leadership benefited enormously from the legacy of reform implemented by Zhao Ziyang and the other liberal reformers in the 1980s. When Deng reigned reform in 1992, most of the basic institutional framework for a market-oriented economy had already been laid. Agriculture, for example, had been privatized, freeing up an immense pool of surplus labor to engage in more productive activities in manufacturing and services. A dynamic private sector had firmly established itself as a new engine of growth. (In 1991 nonstate firms were generating 47 percent of industrial output.)10 China's linkages to the world economy through trade and investment were fully restored by the beginning of the 1990s. Geopolitically, China's ties with the West survived the shock of the Tiananmen crackdown despite the (mostly symbolic) sanctions imposed by its main trading partners in protest. With the end of the Cold War in 1991, China managed to preserve its commercial ties with the West. Instead of being cast aside or isolated, China joined the high tide of globalization championed by the United States, then the world's sole superpower.

天安门事件后的领导层从赵紫阳和其他自由派改革者在20世纪80年代推行的改革遗产中获益匪浅。1992年邓小平执政改革时，市场经济的大部分基本制度框架已经搭建完成。例如，农业私有化释放了大量剩余劳动力，使其能够从事生产性更高的制造业和服务业活动。充满活力的私营部门已稳固确立自身作为新的增长引擎的地位。（1991年，非国有企业创造了47%的工业产值。）到20世纪90年代初，中国通过贸易和投资与世界经济的联系已全面恢复。在地缘政治方面，尽管主要贸易伙伴为抗议天安门事件而实施了（大多是象征性的）制裁，但中国与西方的关系经受住了天安门镇压的冲击。随着1991年冷战的结束，中国成功地维持了与西方的商业联系。中国没有被抛弃或孤立，而是加入了由当时世界唯一的超级大国美国所倡导的全球化浪潮。

Conservative resistance to more radical economic reforms collapsed after Deng's southern tour in early 1992. In November 1993 the party issued a comprehensive package of reform, "Resolution on Several Questions on the Construction of a Socialist Market Economic System."11 With Jiang Zemin's support, Executive Vice Premier Zhu Rongji sidelined the conservative premier Li Peng and supervised the major institutional reforms laid out in the resolution.

邓小平1992年初南巡之后，保守派对更激进的经济改革的抵制瓦解。1993年11月，党发布了一揽子改革方案——《关于建设社会主义市场经济体制若干问题的决议》。在江泽民的支持下，常务副总理朱镕基架空了保守派总理李鹏，并主导了决议中提出的重大体制改革。

The first measure—unification of exchange rates and a major devaluation—went into effect on January 1, 1994. Prior to this reform, China had two exchange rates, with a highly overvalued official exchange rate. Yi Gang, who later became China's central bank governor, has recalled that the average official rate in 1993 was 5.6 yuan to the dollar, while the average market rate was 9.04 yuan to the dollar, implying an overvaluation of roughly 60 percent.12 The dual exchange rates encouraged Chinese firms to withhold their foreign exchange earnings from the central government, fueling black market transactions and disincentivizing exports. The positive impact of the exchange rate reform was felt instantly. The Chinese yuan was effectively devalued by 60 percent, thus making exports highly competitive. The unification of the exchange rates also simplified the administration of foreign exchange and encouraged firms to export.13 Chinese exports in 1994 rose 32 percent vis-à-vis 1993 (in 1993, exports had grown only 8 percent over 1992). China's foreign exchange reserves more than doubled in 1994 (from $21.1 billion in 1993 to $51.6 billion in 1994).14

第一项措施——统一汇率和大幅贬值——于1994年1月1日生效。在此改革之前，中国实行双轨制汇率，官方汇率被严重高估。后来成为中国央行行长的易纲回忆说，1993年官方平均汇率为1美元兑5.6元人民币，而市场平均汇率为1美元兑9.04元人民币，这意味着官方汇率被高估了约60%。这种双重汇率制度促使中国企业将外汇收入隐瞒起来，不上缴中央政府，助长了黑市交易，并抑制了出口。汇率改革的积极影响立竿见影。人民币实际贬值了60%，从而使出口竞争力大幅提升。汇率统一简化了外汇管理，鼓励企业出口。1994年中国出口额较1993年增长32%（1993年出口额较1992年仅增长8%）。1994年中国外汇储备翻了一番多（从1993年的211亿美元增至1994年的516亿美元）。

A revamped fiscal system that recentralized government revenues was also put in place on January 1, 1994. In the 1980s Beijing had resorted to a form of "fiscal contracting"—or tax-farming—to incentivize local governments to increase economic output. Under fiscal contracting, local governments could keep surplus revenues after meeting their previously negotiated quota with Beijing. Although fiscal contracting contributed to local economic dynamism, it also had several major shortcomings. The most serious was a decline in the share of revenue collected by the central government because this arrangement ensured that local governments reaped more benefits of the growth than did Beijing. As a result, the share of the central government was only 22 percent of total government revenue in 1993.15 Lack of fiscal resources limited Beijing's ability to fund infrastructure and other expensive capital projects. Fiscal contracting also encouraged "local protectionism" as provincial governments erected trade barriers to products from other regions so as to protect their local industries.16

1994年1月1日，一项重新集中政府财政收入的改革财政体系正式实施。上世纪80年代，北京曾采取一种“财政契约”（或称包税制）来激励地方政府提高经济产出。根据财政契约，地方政府在完成与北京事先约定的配额后，可以保留剩余收入。尽管财政契约促进了地方经济的活力，但也存在几个重大缺陷。最严重的是中央政府财政收入份额的下降，因为这种安排确保了地方政府比北京获得更多经济增长的收益。结果，1993年中央政府的财政收入仅占政府总收入的22%。财政资源的匮乏限制了北京为基础设施和其他昂贵的资本项目提供资金的能力。财政紧缩也助长了“地方保护主义”，因为省级政府为了保护本地区产业，对来自其他地区的商品设置了贸易壁垒。

In 1993 Zhu Rongji personally negotiated with provincial leaders an agreement on a new fiscal system that would recentralize revenue. At the heart of the reform was the introduction of a national value-added tax, which dramatically broadened the tax base. The central government would receive 75 percent of the value-added tax, with the remainder going to local governments. Local governments could also collect other taxes, but they contributed a much smaller share of taxes. In 1995, one year after the new system went into effect, the value-added tax accounted for 43 percent of total tax revenue.17 To sweeten the deal, the central government allowed local authorities to keep income from the leasing of land, thus giving birth to the so-called land-based fiscal system (tudi caizheng).

1993年，朱镕基亲自与各省领导人协商，达成一项关于重新集中财政收入的新财政体制协议。改革的核心是引入全国增值税，这极大地拓宽了税基。中央政府将获得增值税的75%，其余部分归地方政府所有。地方政府也可以征收其他税种，但其税收份额要小得多。1995年，新体制实施一年后，增值税占税收总额的43%。为了进一步促进改革，中央政府允许地方政府保留土地租赁收入，由此诞生了所谓的土地财政体制。

In subsequent years, the central government's share of fiscal revenue rose dramatically. (During 1996-2000, it shot up to 50 percent.)18 Like all reforms, the fiscal recentralization in 1994 produced winners and losers. In this case, the winner was clearly the central government, which was able to capture the lion's share of the tax revenue generated by China's fast-growing economy in the post-Tiananmen era. Its abundant revenue allowed Beijing to invest in infrastructure, military modernization, and domestic security. The losers were the local governments that subsequently experienced chronic budgetary shortfalls and had to rely increasingly on income from the sale of land-user rights and bank loans to fund their investments and operations. A lack of fiscal resources also limited the local governments' ability to pay for social services.19 On balance, however, the fiscal reform of 1994 largely accomplished Beijing's objectives, despite the mixed outcomes. The fiscal system became more stable, and the lower budget deficits helped contain inflation (from 1980 to 1990 the consumer price index rose 11.6 percent on average annually, but in the decade following implementation of the new fiscal regime the increase averaged only 6.8 percent per annum).20 The central government acquired ever-increasing resources to invest in high-priority projects. The negative effects of the new fiscal system did not become clear until roughly two decades later, when local governments began to borrow heavily from banks to finance their capital projects, thus accumulating a huge amount of debt that they could not repay.21

在随后的几年里，中央政府的财政收入份额大幅上升。（1996年至2000年间，这一比例飙升至50%。）18 与所有改革一样，1994年的财政权力下放改革也产生了赢家和输家。在这种情况下，赢家显然是中央政府，它能够攫取后天安门时代中国快速增长的经济所产生的大部分税收收入。充裕的财政收入使北京得以投资基础设施、军事现代化和国内安全。输家则是地方政府，它们随后经历了长期的财政赤字，不得不越来越依赖土地使用权出售收入和银行贷款来为其投资和运营提供资金。财政资源的匮乏也限制了地方政府支付社会服务的能力。19 然而，总的来说，尽管结果喜忧参半，1994年的财政改革在很大程度上实现了北京的目标。财政体系变得更加稳定，预算赤字的降低有助于抑制通货膨胀（1980年至1990年，消费者价格指数平均每年上涨11.6%，但在新财政制度实施后的十年里，平均年涨幅仅为6.8%）。中央政府获得了越来越多的资源，用于投资高优先级项目。新财政制度的负面影响直到大约二十年后才显现出来，当时地方政府开始大量向银行借款以资助其资本项目，从而积累了巨额债务，最终无力偿还。

A third major reform in the 1990s was the establishment of a modern financial system and increased independence of the central bank, the People's Bank of China (PBOC). At the end of 1993, the State Council announced a comprehensive overhaul of the financial system.22 During the Maoist period, China had no commercial banks. Few financial reforms were carried out in the 1980s as such reforms were technically too complicated and too risky to undertake in a transition economy. But because a modern financial sector is critical to mobilizing savings and allocating capital, the party identified reform of the financial sector, in particular the establishment of a modern banking sector, as a priority in its resolution on pro-market reform issued at the November 1993 Central Committee plenum.

20世纪90年代的第三项重大改革是建立现代金融体系并增强中央银行——中国人民银行（央行）的独立性。1993年底，国务院宣布对金融体系进行全面改革。毛泽东时代，中国没有商业银行。20世纪80年代，由于转型经济体在技术上过于复杂且风险过高，金融改革鲜有开展。但由于现代金融部门对于动员储蓄和配置资本至关重要，党在1993年11月中央全会通过的关于市场化改革的决议中，将金融部门改革，特别是建立现代银行业，列为优先事项。

Financial sector reform encompassed three subsectors: banking, insurance, and capital markets (equity and bonds). Because the insurance industry was relatively small and the tightly regulated capital markets played only a minor role in channeling savings into investments, the most critical sector was banking, the largest component of China's financial system.

金融业改革涵盖三个子行业：银行业、保险业和资本市场（股票和债券）。由于保险业规模相对较小，且监管严格的资本市场在引导储蓄投资方面作用有限，因此，银行业——中国金融体系中规模最大的组成部分——成为最为关键的行业。

The most successful part of the financial reform carried out in the 1990s, also led by Zhu Rongji, was the reform of the PBOC. Local governments had wielded substantial influence over the central bank, whose local branches were set up according to the administrative hierarchy of the state (for example, the PBOC had a branch office in each province and city). Since local governments appointed the leadership and staff of these offices, they could influence the PBOC. Zhu's reform established larger regional PBOC offices responsible for multiple provinces and filled them with officials appointed by the PBOC, making the central bank less dependent on local governments and increasing the technocratic capabilities of its local staff.23 (Xi Jinping would reverse this reform in 2023 and increase party control of monetary policy.)

上世纪90年代朱镕基领导的金融改革中最成功的部分是对中国人民银行的改革。地方政府对央行拥有相当大的影响力，央行的地方分支机构是根据国家行政层级设立的（例如，央行在每个省市都设有分支机构）。由于地方政府任命这些机构的领导和工作人员，因此它们可以影响央行。朱镕基的改革设立了规模更大的区域性央行办事处，负责多个省份，并由央行任命官员，从而降低了央行对地方政府的依赖，并提高了其地方工作人员的技术能力。（习近平在2023年推翻了这项改革，加强了党对货币政策的控制。）

However, the other components of the banking-sector reform achieved mixed results. On the positive side, the reform increased competition in the banking sector and improved supervision, albeit from a very low level. Although the five largest state-owned banks (the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China, Construction Bank of China, Bank of China, Agricultural Bank of China, and Communications Bank) continued to dominate, reform in the 1990s brought in a large number of smaller banks with a diverse set of owners (mostly local governments, state-owned companies, and private and foreign investors), thus moderately increasing competition.24 Separating policy lending from commercial lending, at least technically, the reform created a better division of labor in the financial sector. The policy to allow major Western banks, such as Bank of America, HSBC, and Singapore Development Bank, to purchase up to 20 percent of equity ownership in Chinese banks in the early 2000s was another positive step toward strengthening the financial health of the banking sector and introducing more sophisticated banking practices.

然而，银行业改革的其他组成部分成效不一。积极的一面是，改革增强了银行业的竞争，并改善了监管，尽管监管力度仍然很低。虽然五大国有银行（中国工商银行、中国建设银行、中国银行、中国农业银行和交通银行）仍然占据主导地位，但20世纪90年代的改革引入了大量规模较小的银行，这些银行的所有者构成也更加多元化（主要是地方政府、国有企业以及私人和外国投资者），从而在一定程度上增强了竞争。改革将政策性贷款与商业贷款分开，至少在技术层面上，这在金融领域实现了更合理的分工。21世纪初，允许美国银行、汇丰银行和新加坡发展银行等西方大型银行收购中国银行至多20%的股权的政策，是加强银行业的财务健康和引入更成熟的银行业务实践的又一积极举措。

At the same time, the banking reform in the post-Tiananmen era did not create a truly market-based system. The state-controlled banks continued to channel a disproportionate amount of credit to the SOEs and to discriminate against the more efficient private firms. One survey of private firms at the end of the 1990s found that bank loans provided only 4 percent of the start-up capital and about 9 percent of the operating funds of private firms.25 Consequently, private firms often had to resort to bribery to gain bank credit or had to tap into the more costly and less stable shadow banking system for credit.26

与此同时，天安门事件后的银行业改革并未建立起真正以市场为导向的体系。国有银行继续将不成比例的信贷输送给国有企业，并歧视效率更高的私营企业。20世纪90年代末的一项针对私营企业的调查发现，银行贷款仅占私营企业启动资金的4%和运营资金的9%左右。因此，私营企业往往不得不通过行贿来获得银行贷款，或者不得不依赖成本更高、稳定性更差的影子银行体系来获取信贷。

Progress in developing other parts of the financial system, such as equity and debt markets, was similarly uneven. China established these markets in the early 1990s, but initially it limited access only to state-owned enterprises and other state entities. Even after private firms were allowed access, an effective quota system led to a complex and time-consuming process to obtain approvals to raise capital. Foreign investors could only invest in B-class shares, which had far less liquidity than the A-class shares that were available to domestic investors. Although China's equity markets grew significantly in the post-Tiananmen era and would boast about 2,500 listed companies, with a total market value of 23 trillion yuan (over $3 trillion) in 2012, they remained a secondary channel through which firms could raise capital. By comparison, the outstanding credit of the banking system in the same year was 63 trillion yuan, nearly three times larger than the total market value of Chinese stocks.27

金融体系其他部分的发展，例如股票和债券市场，同样不均衡。中国在20世纪90年代初建立了这些市场，但最初仅限于国有企业和其他国有实体参与。即使在允许私营企业进入之后，有效的配额制度也导致融资审批流程复杂且耗时。外国投资者只能投资B类股，其流动性远低于国内投资者可投资的A类股。尽管中国股票市场在天安门事件后发展迅速，2012年拥有约2500家上市公司，总市值达23万亿元人民币（超过3万亿美元），但它们仍然是企业融资的次要渠道。相比之下，同年银行体系的未偿信贷额为63万亿元人民币，几乎是中国股票总市值的三倍。

Reform of the SOEs, which made little progress in the 1980s, was another priority of the government in the 1990s. However, because the party initially resisted large-scale privatization and mass bankruptcy of unprofitable SOEs due to ideological concerns and worries about social unrest, it preferred mostly half-measures, such as leasing, mergers, and a comprehensive program of "establishing a modern enterprise system based primarily on state ownership.28 The party's conception of a "modern enterprise system" appeared to be inspired by the corporate governance system prevalent in the West. Chinese reformers hoped that by adopting a Western-style corporate governance system they could make SOEs more efficient without changing their ownership.

20世纪80年代进展甚微的国有企业改革，在90年代成为政府的另一项优先事项。然而，由于意识形态上的顾虑以及对社会动荡的担忧，中共最初抵制大规模私有化和亏损国有企业的集体破产，因此更倾向于采取折衷方案，例如租赁、合并以及“建立以国有制为主的现代企业制度”的综合方案。中共对“现代企业制度”的构想似乎受到了西方盛行的公司治理体系的启发。中国改革者希望通过借鉴西方式的公司治理体系，在不改变国有企业所有权的情况下提高其效率。

As a consequence, many large SOEs went through mostly cosmetic changes, such as establishment of a board of directors, regular financial disclosures, and audits conducted by professional firms. Some were listed on domestic and international stock exchanges to attract nonstate minority investments and to create external pressures and oversight as tools to increase SOE efficiency. Yet, these reforms did not divest the state of complete or partial ownership. Most crucially but logically, the SOEs continued to serve the interests of the party, which retained effective control over these firms through management appointments. In theory, the party's "modern enterprise system" was supposed to maximize efficiency and improve the financial performance of the SOEs. In reality, the party's most important objective in retaining control over the SOEs was not to increase their economic value but to use them as tools to maintain a patronage system to reward loyalists, to implement industrial policy for regime and national security purposes, and to allocate SOE investments to balance factional and regional competition for resources. The subordination of economic efficiency to the party's self-interests inevitably meant that efforts to build a "modern enterprise system" would unlikely succeed in turning the SOEs into truly efficient and competitive firms. Indeed, the cosmetic reforms implemented in the 1990s failed to address most of the long-standing SOE problems, such as soft-budget constraints, low profitability, bloated employment, and excess wages and benefits.29

因此，许多大型国有企业经历了表面上的改革，例如设立董事会、定期披露财务信息以及接受专业公司的审计。一些国有企业在国内和国际证券交易所上市，以吸引非国有少数股权投资，并利用外部压力和监督来提高国有企业的效率。然而，这些改革并未剥夺国家全部或部分所有权。最关键也最合乎逻辑的是，国有企业继续服务于党的利益，党通过管理层任命对这些企业保持着有效的控制。理论上，党的“现代企业制度”旨在最大限度地提高效率并改善国有企业的财务业绩。但实际上，党维持对国有企业控制的最重要目标并非提升其经济价值，而是将其作为工具，以维持裙带关系体系，奖励忠诚者，实施符合政权和国家安全的产业政策，并分配国有企业投资以平衡各派系和地区对资源的竞争。经济效率屈从于党的自身利益，这必然意味着，构建“现代企业制度”的努力不太可能成功地将国有企业转变为真正高效且具有竞争力的企业。事实上，20世纪90年代实施的表面改革未能解决国有企业长期存在的诸多问题，例如预算约束不明确、盈利能力低下、人员臃肿以及工资福利过高等。

In 2003 the party tried a different approach—it decided to imitate Singapore's model of managing state-owned assets. As in China, Singapore's largest firms are state-owned or state-controlled. But the city-state established an agency—Temasek—to which the state transferred its shares so it could function as a more independent and effective supervisor. China thus set up its own version of Temasek—the State Asset Supervision and Administration Commission (SASAC)—in 2003. Its mandate was to exercise the power of the owner of the asset and monitor SOE operations and financial performance. Initially it was responsible for overseeing about two hundred large "centrally owned SOEs," whose state-owned shares were transferred to SASAC. Provinces also formed their SASAC equivalents to oversee provincially owned enterprises. Theoretically, this new bureaucracy would assume sole responsibility for management and prevent other state bureaucracies from interfering. Unlike Temasek, however, SASAC had one fatal design flaw. In Singapore, the ruling People's Action Party does not appoint management of the country's SOEs, leaving the responsibility to Temasek. But in China, the CCP's Organization Department, not SASAC, is empowered to appoint or remove SOE management, thus significantly weakening the supervisory role of SASAC.30 Consequently, the setting up of SASAC produced no meaningful improvement in efficiency, as demonstrated by the persistent underperformance of SOEs relative to private firms in terms of profitability, generation of employment, and debt levels.31

2003年，中共尝试了一种不同的方法——效仿新加坡管理国有资产的模式。与中国一样，新加坡最大的企业也是国有或国有控股企业。但新加坡设立了淡马锡控股（Temasek），政府将其股份转让给该机构，使其能够发挥更独立、更有效的监管作用。因此，中国在2003年也成立了类似淡马锡的机构——国资委（SASAC）。国资委的职责是行使资产所有者的权力，监督国有企业的运营和财务绩效。最初，国资委负责监管约200家大型“中央所有制企业”，这些企业的国有股份已转让给国资委。各省也成立了与国资委类似的机构，负责监管省属企业。理论上，这个新的官僚机构将承担全部管理责任，防止其他国家官僚机构干预。然而，与淡马锡不同的是，国资委存在一个致命的设计缺陷。在新加坡，执政的人民行动党并不任命国有企业的管理层，而是将这项责任交给了淡马锡控股。但在中国，任命或罢免国有企业管理层的权力属于中共的组织部，而非国资委，这大大削弱了国资委的监管作用。因此，国资委的设立并未带来效率上的实质性提升，国有企业在盈利能力、创造就业和债务水平等方面持续落后于私营企业，便证明了这一点。

Ironically, the most successful measure implemented by the party to reform the SOEs was the one it wanted to talk about the least: privatization and mass bankruptcy of loss-making small and medium-sized enterprises. In the mid-1990s the overall strategy of reforming SOEs was to "grasp the large and release the small"—focusing on improving the large SOEs but letting the smaller SOEs sink or swim. "Grasping the large" achieved at best modest results, as illustrated by the outcomes of corporatization and the experience of SASAC. "Releasing the small" meant, literally, allowing small and medium-sized SOEs to be restructured or liquidated through whatever means that could take these zombie firms off the hands of the government. Initially, releasing the small proceeded slowly and cautiously, and it appeared to take the form of management buyouts (insider privatization), mergers, and leasing. This process created opportunities for SOE management and well-connected private entrepreneurs to obtain state assets at steep discounts.32

具有讽刺意味的是，党推行的国有企业改革中最成功的措施，恰恰是它最不愿提及的：对亏损的中小型企业进行私有化和大规模破产清算。上世纪90年代中期，国有企业改革的总体战略是“抓大放小”——重点改善大型国有企业，而对小型国有企业则任其自生自灭。“抓大放小”充其量只能取得有限的成效，公司化改革的后果以及国资委的经验便是最好的证明。“放小放小”的字面意思，就是允许通过任何能够将这些“僵尸企业”从政府手中剥离的手段，对中小国有企业进行重组或清算。最初，“放小放小”的进程缓慢而谨慎，其形式似乎主要是管理层收购（内部私有化）、合并和租赁。这一过程为国有企业管理层和人脉广泛的私营企业家提供了以极低价格获得国有资产的机会。

After the East Asian financial crisis of 1997, Chinese leaders endorsed a drastic solution: the mass bankruptcy of small and medium-sized SOEs that could no longer be sustained without endangering the undercapitalized banking system. Judging by official data, this was carried out in 1998 quickly and most probably with no prior planning. The number of industrial SOEs in 1997 was 110,000, representing a moderate decline of about 17,000 over 1996, and with the overall number of SOEs peaking at 127,600. This indicates that releasing the small began in 1997 but proceeded slowly. However, the shock of the East Asian financial crisis, which led to the collapse of currencies in Thailand, South Korea, and Indonesia and the fall of the long-ruling Suharto regime in Indonesia, forced Chinese leaders to take the unprecedented step of closing, in the industrial sector alone, nearly 55,000 SOEs and laying off 13 million workers in 1998. In 1999 they shuttered an additional 3,400 firms and laid off roughly 12 million workers.33

1997年东亚金融危机后，中国领导人批准了一项激进的解决方案：大规模破产清算那些无法在不危及资本不足的银行体系的情况下继续维持运营的中小国有企业。根据官方数据，这项举措于1998年迅速实施，很可能事先没有任何规划。1997年，工业国有企业数量为11万家，较1996年略微减少了约1.7万家，而国有企业总数峰值为12.76万家。这表明，释放中小企业的进程始于1997年，但进展缓慢。然而，东亚金融危机的冲击导致泰国、韩国和印尼货币崩溃，以及印尼长期执政的苏哈托政权垮台，迫使中国领导人采取了前所未有的举措：仅在工业领域，1998年就关闭了近5.5万家国有企业，裁员1300万人。1999年，他们又关闭了3400家企业，裁员约1200万人。

Economically, releasing the small definitely achieved its desired objective of ridding the state of massive liabilities. But this achievement came with enormous social costs, as tens of millions of workers in the bankrupt SOEs were cast out on their own, most with no social safety net. Many fell into poverty.34 Even though the government faced waves of demonstrations by the large number of laid-off workers, it managed to contain and ultimately suppress them through coercive means.35

从经济角度来看，释放小企业无疑实现了其预期目标，即摆脱国家巨额债务。但这一成就也带来了巨大的社会代价，数千万破产国有企业的员工被迫失业，其中大多数人没有任何社会保障。许多人陷入了贫困。尽管政府面临着大量下岗工人的多次示威游行，但它最终还是通过强制手段控制并镇压了这些示威活动。

The housing reform launched in the mid-1990s created a powerful new engine of growth. In July 1994 the State Council released a package of policies to privatize state-owned housing. Subsequently, state-owned housing units rented to employees in government-affiliated entities were privatized at heavily subsidized prices. Four years later the State Council issued a document promoting development of a private real estate market to address the housing shortages. In retrospect, the real estate boom during the subsequent two decades constituted a powerful engine of growth before it began to lose steam in the mid-2010s.36

20世纪90年代中期启动的住房改革催生了强劲的新增长引擎。1994年7月，国务院出台了一系列国有住房私有化政策。随后，政府机构员工租住的国有住房以高额补贴价格私有化。四年后，国务院发布文件，推动发展私人房地产市场以解决住房短缺问题。回顾过去，随后二十年的房地产繁荣成为强劲的增长引擎，直到2010年代中期才开始放缓。

On balance, the reforms of the 1990s achieved mixed results. On the positive side, they strengthened the fiscal system significantly and made the financial system moderately more market-oriented. Policies to privatize housing and promote the real estate market unleashed a powerful source of growth. But the efforts to reform the SOEs were largely unsuccessful. The strategy of "grasping the large and releasing the small" preserved state control over big firms in strategic sectors, such as telecommunications, energy, transportation, and finance, but did not improve their efficiency. The mass bankruptcy of small and medium-sized SOEs did succeed in shutting down the loss-making firms that the state could no longer support, thus producing an improvement in efficiency, but this was carried out in a hasty and chaotic manner that impoverished tens of millions of workers.

总体而言，20世纪90年代的改革成效不一。积极的一面是，这些改革显著加强了财政体系，并使金融体系在一定程度上更加市场化。住房私有化和房地产市场促进政策释放了强劲的增长动力。但国有企业改革的努力大多以失败告终。“抓大放小”的战略虽然维持了国家对电信、能源、交通和金融等战略性行业大型企业的控制，但并未提高它们的效率。大规模中小国有企业破产确实关闭了国家无力继续扶持的亏损企业，从而提高了效率，但这一过程仓促混乱，导致数千万工人陷入贫困。





Ascendance of the Private Sector





私营部门的崛起


If the party's efforts to reform the SOEs in the post-Tiananmen era ended mostly in failure, an unintended consequence of this setback was the rapid rise of the private sector, which consisted of private domestic and foreign-invested firms. As described earlier, the government's inability to turn around the inefficient SOEs with half measures finally forced it to embrace mass bankruptcy of the small and medium SOEs in 1998-1999. This solution, adopted out of desperation to avoid wrecking China's banking system, caused massive losses of jobs and income for those workers employed in these firms. However, the exit of tens of thousands of SOEs also created opportunities for the private sector. The fire sale of the assets of the bankrupt SOEs allowed their managers to obtain them cheaply and to set up their own businesses, often in controversial if not illicit collaboration with private entrepreneurs.

如果说中共在后天安门时代对国有企业的改革努力大多以失败告终，那么这一挫折带来的一个意想不到的后果便是私营经济的迅速崛起，其中包括国内私营企业和外商投资企业。正如前文所述，政府无法通过半吊子的措施扭转低效国有企业的颓势，最终迫使其在1998-1999年间对中小国有企业实施大规模破产。这一出于避免摧毁中国银行体系的无奈之举，导致这些企业员工大量失业，收入锐减。然而，数万家国有企业的退出也为私营经济创造了机遇。破产国有企业的资产被贱卖，使得其管理者得以低价购得这些资产，并创办自己的企业，而这种创办往往伴随着争议，甚至可能涉及非法行为，例如与私营企业家进行合作。

Ironically, the lack of a comprehensive program of privatization conceived and approved by the central government enabled local authorities and SOE management to adopt flexible, innovative, and often questionable methods of transferring the assets of the struggling or bankrupt SOEs to private entities.37 Because most of these transactions were conducted opaquely and the purchasers of the SOE assets were managers and well-connected private entrepreneurs, conservatives and the so-called new left—scholars opposing neoliberal reforms because they were exploitative—vociferously denounced the deals as an "erosion and loss of state assets," insisting that assets sold to management and private entrepreneurs were deliberately and significantly underpriced at the expense of the Chinese people, who nominally owned these assets.38 Academic research, indeed, provides evidence that these assets were sold cheaply during privatization. Large-scale, officially sanctioned national surveys of private firms conducted in the early 2000s reveal that, on average, the assets of the SOEs were underpriced by about 20 percent. Managers who bought these assets enjoyed a discount of 30 percent.39

具有讽刺意味的是，由于缺乏中央政府构思和批准的全面私有化方案，地方政府和国有企业管理层得以采取灵活、创新且往往颇具争议的方式，将陷入困境或破产的国有企业的资产转移给私人实体。由于这些交易大多不透明，且国有企业资产的购买者是管理层和人脉广泛的私营企业家，保守派和所谓的“新左派”（反对新自由主义改革，认为其具有剥削性的学者）强烈谴责这些交易是“国有资产的侵蚀和损失”，坚称出售给管理层和私营企业家的资产被故意大幅压低价格，损害了名义上拥有这些资产的中国人民的利益。学术研究确实提供了证据，证明这些资产在私有化过程中被低价出售。 2000年代初期，官方授权开展的大规模全国性私营企业调查显示，国有企业的资产平均被低估了约20%。收购这些资产的管理者则享受了30%的折扣。

However, critics decrying privatization as a process in which state-owned assets were sold too cheaply apparently ignored two crucial factors. First, those willing to buy the assets of the underperforming or nearly bankrupt SOEs took enormous risks and understandably demanded deep discounts. Second, China had no functioning institutions that could price such assets correctly. It was impossible to determine the appropriate price at which such assets should be sold.

然而，批评者们指责私有化过程中国有资产被低价出售，显然忽略了两个关键因素。首先，那些愿意收购业绩不佳或濒临破产的国有企业资产的人承担了巨大的风险，因此他们要求大幅折扣也是情理之中的。其次，中国当时没有有效的机构能够对这些资产进行合理定价。因此，根本无法确定这些资产的合理售价。

In any case, the mass bankruptcy of tens of thousands of SOEs and the quick disposal of their discounted assets most likely boosted economic performance during the Hu era. With one stroke, privatization achieved three objectives: ending the waste of precious resources on zombie firms, saving the banking system, and transferring underperforming assets to private firms that could deploy them more productively. One study shows that, after privatization, private firms utilizing the same assets that were previously owned by collective firms could increase their output on average by 5-7 percent. Since private firms were more efficient than collective firms, it is reasonable to assume that the assets of SOEs in the hands of private firms would be utilized even more productively.40

无论如何，胡锦涛时代数万家国有企业的大规模破产以及其折价资产的快速处置很可能促进了经济发展。私有化一举实现了三个目标：停止将宝贵资源浪费在僵尸企业上，拯救银行体系，并将低效资产转移给能够更高效利用这些资产的私营企业。一项研究表明，私有化后，私营企业利用原国有企业拥有的相同资产，平均产出可提高5%至7%。由于私营企业的效率高于国有企业，因此可以合理推断，国有企业的资产在私营企业手中将得到更高效的利用。

Parallel to the privatization of small and medium SOEs was the conversion of TVEs into private firms. Since a large number of these were private firms that had disguised themselves as TVEs when they were first established in the 1980s, part of this process was not privatization but normalization. The real owners—rural entrepreneurs who had established them—simply gained formal legal title to their property. Another part of the process involved the privatization of collectively owned assets. The transformation of TVEs into private firms began in southern Jiangsu in 1994 and quickly spread to other parts of the country. Nearly all TVEs had been converted to private firms by the end of the Jiang era.41 This is evidenced by the rapid decline of employment in "collectively owned" firms (in all sectors) and the corresponding rise of employment in private firms from the mid-1990s to 2002 (table 5.3).

与中小国有企业私有化并行的是乡镇企业向私营企业的转型。由于其中许多私营企业在20世纪80年代初创时就伪装成乡镇企业，因此这一过程的一部分并非私有化，而是规范化。真正的所有者——创办这些企业的农村企业家——只是获得了对其财产的正式法律所有权。该过程的另一部分涉及集体所有制资产的私有化。乡镇企业向私营企业的转型始于1994年江苏南部，并迅速蔓延至全国其他地区。到江泽民时代末期，几乎所有乡镇企业都已转型为私营企业。41 这可以从20世纪90年代中期至2002年期间“集体所有制”企业（所有行业）就业人数的迅速下降以及私营企业就业人数的相应增长得到证实（表5.3）。

The positive impact of the privatization of TVEs was the emergence of some of China's largest and most successful private corporations, such as Fuyao Glass (which later became one of the world's leading makers of automobile glass, as featured in the Oscar-winning documentary, American Factory), Wanxiang Group (maker of auto parts), and Hope Group (agrobusiness).

乡镇企业私有化的积极影响是催生了一些中国规模最大、最成功的私营企业，例如福耀玻璃（后来成为世界领先的汽车玻璃制造商之一，并在奥斯卡获奖纪录片《美国工厂》中有所介绍）、万向集团（汽车零部件制造商）和希望集团（农业综合企业）。

TABLE 5.3. Employment in the Post-Tiananmen Era (in millions)

表 5.3. 天安门事件后时代的就业情况（单位：百万）

* Both urban and rural; private firms do not include individual (geti) businesses.

* 包括城市和农村；私营企业不包括个体（geti）企业。

Source: ZGTJNJ 2013, e-book.

来源：ZGTJNJ 2013，电子书。



TABLE 5.4. Utilized FDI, 1993-2012 (in billion USD)

表 5.4. 1993-2012 年外国直接投资利用情况（单位：十亿美元）

Source: Calculated from ZGTJNJ 2013, e-book.

来源：根据 ZGTJNJ 2013 年电子书计算得出。



Privatization in the 1990s enabled the private sector to eclipse the state sector as the most important engine of economic growth and job creation during the post-Tiananmen period. In terms of employment, the state sector employed 103.5 million people in 1990, compared to only 1.7 million in private firms. By 2012, employment in the state sector had declined to 68.4 million, while that in private firms had increased to 113 million (table 5.4). The decline in the number of SOEs in industrial sectors was most pronounced. For example, SOEs in the manufacturing sector employed 34.4 million people in 1993. By 2002, their employment had fallen to 9.8 million, a decrease of more than two-thirds. SOEs in mining and construction saw their employment fall by more than half during the same period.42 The output of SOEs plummeted correspondingly. In 1993 SOEs accounted for 43 percent of China's total industrial output. By 2011, their share had fallen to 26 percent.43

20世纪90年代的私有化使私营部门在后天安门时代超越国有部门，成为经济增长和创造就业的最重要引擎。就就业而言，1990年国有部门的就业人数为1.035亿，而私营企业仅为170万人。到2012年，国有部门的就业人数下降至6840万人，而私营企业的就业人数则增至1.13亿人（表5.4）。工业部门国有企业数量的下降最为显著。例如，1993年制造业国有企业的就业人数为3440万人。到2002年，其就业人数下降至980万人，减少了三分之二以上。同期，采矿和建筑业国有企业的就业人数也减少了一半以上。国有企业的产出也相应大幅下降。 1993年，国有企业占中国工业总产值的43%。到2011年，这一比例下降到26%。

Fast-growing domestic private firms became a powerful force in China's industrial sector. In 1993 the share of industrial output by domestic nonstate firms reached 47 percent. By 2011, private firms contributed 46.6 percent of industrial output, and foreign-invested firms accounted for 25.8 percent (about the same as the SOEs), while the share of collectively owned firms fell to 1.3 percent.44 Even though the party did not actively promote the private sector, it deserves credit for taking the crucial political steps to give it legitimacy and protection. In March 1999 the party-controlled National People's Congress passed a constitutional amendment that formally recognized the legal status of nonstate economic entities. Jiang's theory of the "Three Represents," first unveiled in early 2000 and written into the party's charter in 2002, elevated the political status of private entrepreneurs by identifying them as a group the party should represent and recruit.

快速发展的国内民营企业成为中国工业领域的一股强大力量。1993年，国内非国有企业占工业总产值的47%。到2011年，民营企业占工业总产值的46.6%，外商投资企业占25.8%（与国有企业大致持平），而集体所有制企业的份额下降到1.3%。尽管党并未积极推动民营经济的发展，但它采取了关键的政治措施，赋予民营经济合法性和保护作用，这一点值得肯定。1999年3月，党控制的全国人民代表大会通过了宪法修正案，正式承认非国有经济实体的法律地位。江泽民提出的“三个代表”理论于2000年初首次提出，并于2002年写入党章，该理论将民营企业家明确为党应该代表和招募的群体，从而提升了民营企业家的政治地位。





Globalization





全球化


China's opening in the post-Tiananmen era was more aggressive and far-reaching than its domestic reforms. Policies to attract FDI and increase exports in the post-Cold War era were necessary for China to build commercial ties with the triumphant West and to avoid geopolitical isolation. At the same time, the globalization championed by the United States and its allies after the end of the Cold War provided China with an unprecedented opportunity to utilize its comparative advantage of cheap labor to compete for a larger share in the global marketplace. Zhao Ziyang should receive credit for the strategy of closely integrating China into the world economy in the late 1980s when he proposed prioritizing development of the coastal areas as platforms to connect with the global economy. Although Zhao was purged during the Tiananmen crisis, his economic strategy not only survived him but also yielded spectacular outcomes few Chinese leaders could have imagined in the 1980s.

后天安门时代，中国的对外开放比其国内改革更为积极和深远。冷战后，吸引外商直接投资、增加出口的政策对于中国与西方建立经贸联系、避免地缘政治孤立至关重要。与此同时，冷战结束后，美国及其盟友倡导的全球化为中国提供了一个前所未有的机遇，使其能够利用自身廉价劳动力的比较优势，在全球市场中争取更大的份额。赵紫阳在20世纪80年代末提出的将中国紧密融入世界经济的战略功不可没，他主张优先发展沿海地区，将其作为连接全球经济的平台。尽管赵紫阳在天安门事件中遭到清洗，但他的经济战略不仅在他去世后得以延续，而且取得了在20世纪80年代鲜有中国领导人能够想象的辉煌成就。

One measurement of China's embrace of globalization in the post-Tiananmen era is its success in attracting FDI. Between 1979 and 1989, foreign firms invested about $16 billion in China. But starting in 1992, foreign investors dramatically increased their bets on China. In 1992 alone, they invested $11 billion in China.45 In the subsequent two decades, the amount of FDI would reach a staggering $1.24 trillion (table 5.4).

衡量中国在后天安门时代融入全球化程度的一个指标是其吸引外商直接投资的成功程度。1979年至1989年间，外国企业在中国的投资额约为160亿美元。但自1992年起，外国投资者对华投资大幅增加。仅1992年一年，他们在华投资额就达到了110亿美元。在随后的二十年里，外商直接投资额更是达到了惊人的1.24万亿美元（见表5.4）。

Several factors turned China into a favored destination for direct investments by foreign companies. In the early 1990s the government opened up more cities, including the major cities along the Yangtze River (such as Chongqing and Wuhan) and all inland provincial capitals, to foreign investors and allowed them to offer the same preferential terms as were initially made available only to foreign investors in the SEZs. To compete for foreign capital, local governments built large industrial parks and provided subsidies, such as cheap land and tax holidays. The most important city to become a giant SEZ in the early 1990s was Shanghai's Pudong area. With Deng's constant prodding, the government approved the city's proposal to open up Pudong to foreign investors in the 1990s. Within a few years, the area was transformed into a high-tech manufacturing hub built mainly with foreign direct investment.46 Furthermore, the process to approve FDI projects was simplified and decentralized. In Guangdong, for example, the government allowed cities to approve projects under $30 million and counties to approve projects under $15 million.47 Liberalized rules were adopted so that FDI projects not on the "restricted" or "prohibited" lists were all allowed.48 Further liberalization measures implemented in the early 1990s included amendments to the laws on joint ventures and wholly foreign-owned enterprises and passage of new laws and regulations on income tax, intellectual property, and foreign exchange that made it easier for foreign investors to conduct business.49 As a result, foreign firms were permitted to form retail joint ventures in several major cities and to become involved in natural resource exploration. They could also invest in power generation and infrastructure using the build-operate-transfer model. American International Group (AIG) was given a coveted license to sell some insurance products in Shanghai, and foreign banks could conduct local currency transactions.50

多种因素促使中国成为外国企业直接投资的热门目的地。20世纪90年代初，政府向外国投资者开放了更多城市，包括长江沿岸主要城市（如重庆和武汉）以及所有内陆省会城市，并允许他们提供与最初仅对经济特区外国投资者相同的优惠条件。为了吸引外资，地方政府建设了大型工业园区，并提供诸如廉价土地和税收优惠等补贴。20世纪90年代初，上海浦东新区成为最重要的经济特区。在邓小平的不断推动下，政府在20世纪90年代批准了上海提出的浦东对外开放的提案。短短几年内，浦东就转型成为一个主要依靠外商直接投资建设的高科技制造业中心。此外，外商直接投资项目的审批流程也得到了简化和分散。例如，在广东省，政府允许市级政府批准3000万美元以下的项目，县级政府批准1500万美元以下的项目。47 放宽了相关规定，使得不在“限制”或“禁止”名单上的外商直接投资项目全部获准进行。48 20世纪90年代初，进一步的自由化措施包括修订合资企业和外商独资企业相关法律，以及颁布新的所得税、知识产权和外汇相关法律法规，这些措施使外国投资者更容易开展业务。49 因此，外国公司获准在几个主要城市成立零售合资企业，并参与自然资源勘探。他们还可以采用建设-运营-移交模式投资发电和基础设施建设。美国国际集团（AIG）获得了在上海销售部分保险产品的宝贵许可证，外国银行也可以进行本币交易。50

Although the government's policies definitely helped make China an attractive destination for FDI, other factors were in its favor as well. Perhaps the most important was timing. The revival of the country's reform and opening after the Tiananmen crackdown occurred just after the end of the Cold War and the beginning of the high tide of globalization. In East Asia, Japan and the four little dragons—Hong Kong, Taiwan, Korea, and Singapore—began to lose their competitiveness in labor-intensive manufacturing, forcing their companies to relocate elsewhere. Because of its vast pool of cheap labor and its geographical proximity, China was an ideal destination. In 1992 the average hourly wage of a Chinese manufacturing worker was a mere 1.27 yuan, or $0.16 at the unofficial exchange rate of 8 yuan to one dollar.51 By one estimate, the wage of Chinese manufacturing workers in the early 1990s was the lowest in Asia.52

尽管政府的政策无疑有助于中国成为外商直接投资的理想目的地，但其他因素也对其有利。其中最重要的或许是时机。天安门事件后，中国重启改革开放，恰逢冷战结束和全球化浪潮兴起之际。在东亚，日本和“四小龙”（香港、台湾、韩国和新加坡）在劳动密集型制造业的竞争力开始下降，迫使其企业迁往他处。由于拥有庞大的廉价劳动力和地理位置优势，中国成为理想的投资目的地。1992年，中国制造业工人的平均时薪仅为1.27元人民币，按当时8元兑1美元的非官方汇率计算，约合0.16美元。据估计，20世纪90年代初中国制造业工人的工资是亚洲最低的。

China enjoyed an additional unique advantage: its huge diaspora in the region. Successful ethnic Chinese entrepreneurs in Hong Kong and Taiwan, in particular, were eager to utilize their cultural and social connections to the mainland as a competitive edge in identifying investment opportunities.53 Official data for 1997-2006, for example, show that investors from Hong Kong alone accounted for about 35 percent of total FDI utilized during this period, with Taiwan contributing about 6 percent.54 The amount of FDI flowing from Hong Kong was likely inflated due to the practice of “round-tripping”—mainland Chinese firms would first transfer their capital to the former British colony and then use the same capital to invest in the mainland as FDI so they could enjoy greater legal protections and take advantage of the preferential treatment Beijing had granted to foreign investors.55

中国还拥有一项独特的优势：其在该地区拥有庞大的华人社群。尤其是在香港和台湾，成功的华裔企业家们渴望利用他们与大陆的文化和社会联系，在寻找投资机会时获得竞争优势。例如，1997年至2006年的官方数据显示，仅香港投资者就占同期外商直接投资总额的约35%，台湾投资者则占约6%。由于“循环投资”的做法，香港的外商直接投资额可能被夸大了——中国大陆企业会先将资金转移到这个前英国殖民地，然后用同样的资金以外商直接投资的形式投资大陆，从而享受更完善的法律保护，并利用北京给予外国投资者的优惠待遇。

China also had a geopolitical turn of good fortune in the early 1990s. The United States and its allies decided to continue their policy of engagement and integration with China despite the Tiananmen crackdown and the end of the Cold War, which overnight had reduced China's strategic value to the West. President Bill Clinton's 1994 decision to stop linking China's most-favored nation (MFN) trading status to its human rights record lifted a dark shadow over Sino-American commercial ties.

20世纪90年代初，中国也迎来了地缘政治上的转机。尽管天安门事件和冷战的结束一夜之间削弱了中国对西方的战略价值，美国及其盟友仍决定继续推行与中国的接触和一体化政策。1994年，比尔·克林顿总统决定停止将中国的最惠国待遇与人权记录挂钩，这为中美商业关系扫清了一道阴霾。

Additionally, the party's renewed commitment to reform and opening after Deng's southern tour in 1992 and the explosive growth momentum unleashed thereafter significantly brightened China's economic future, making the country not only a cost-competitive and business-friendly export platform but also a fast-growing market for Western goods and services. The fierce competitive dynamics that pitted Western firms against one another in outsourcing their production to low-cost manufacturers benefited China immensely, since companies reluctant to invest in China would likely be outcompeted by their rivals that could take advantage of China's lower labor costs and large market. In the 1990s domestic Chinese firms were not strong enough to compete against foreign firms. With government policies giving foreign firms many advantages denied to domestic firms, foreign investors could count on capturing a significant share of the Chinese market.56

此外，1992年邓小平南巡后，党重申改革开放的决心，此后经济爆发式增长，极大地提振了中国的经济前景，使中国不仅成为具有成本竞争力和营商环境友好的出口平台，也成为西方商品和服务快速增长的市场。西方企业竞相将生产外包给低成本制造商，由此产生的激烈竞争使中国受益匪浅，因为不愿投资中国的企业很可能被那些能够利用中国较低劳动力成本和庞大市场的竞争对手挤出局。20世纪90年代，中国本土企业实力不足以与外国企业竞争。由于政府政策给予外国企业诸多国内企业无法享有的优势，外国投资者得以占据中国市场相当大的份额。

Massive inflows of FDI brought China bountiful benefits. In 1993 foreign-invested firms employed 2.87 million people. By 2012, more than 22 million Chinese were working in these companies.57 In addition to the employment, capital, and technology that came with FDI, such investments generated significant spillover effects and improved the efficiency of Chinese firms. Foreign-invested firms allowed to sell goods inside of China increased competition in the marketplace, forcing domestic firms to improve their productivity and services. FDI firms also added to China's human capital by training a large pool of skilled labor and management. Once they reached a critical mass, such firms helped create local supply chains and form clusters of specialized industrial ecosystems, such as electronics in Shenzhen and Kunshan (near Shanghai).

大量外商直接投资（FDI）为中国带来了丰厚的收益。1993年，外商投资企业雇佣了287万人。到2012年，超过2200万中国人受雇于这些企业。除了外商直接投资带来的就业、资本和技术之外，此类投资还产生了显著的溢出效应，并提高了中国企业的效率。获准在中国境内销售商品的外商投资企业加剧了市场竞争，迫使国内企业提高生产力和服务水平。外商直接投资企业还通过培养大量技术工人和管理人员，丰富了中国的人力资本。一旦达到一定规模，这些企业便有助于建立本地供应链，并形成专业化的产业生态系统集群，例如深圳和昆山（上海附近）的电子产业集群。

The transfer of tangible and intangible know-how to domestic Chinese firms via the FDI process was invaluable, albeit difficult to calculate.58

通过外商直接投资向中国国内企业转移有形和无形技术诀窍的价值是无法估量的。

The most significant impact of FDI in the post-Tiananmen era was on China's foreign trade. As part of the global trend of outsourcing manufacturing to countries with low labor costs, the majority of foreign firms used China as a processing center that assembled imported components to make products for export. Called "processing trade," this model served the interests of foreign investors well because they could utilize China's ultra-cheap labor and thus reduce costs. For China, FDI made the country a global foreign trade juggernaut. In 1992 foreign-invested firms accounted for 26 percent of China's total foreign trade in goods and 20 percent of its exports. By 2012, the share of foreign-invested firms in China's total foreign merchandise trade rose to 50 percent.59 The rapid increase of foreign-invested firms in imports and exports reflects the role of "processing trade." Indeed, the share of processing trade rose steadily during the post-Tiananmen era, hovering between 50 and 57 percent of total exports from 1996 to 2006. FDI-funded firms accounted for 75–85 percent of China's processing trade between 2002 and 2008. Processing trade began to decline slightly toward the end of the Hu era. In 2012, 47 percent of China's merchandise trade was processing trade.60

天安门事件后，外商直接投资对中国对外贸易的影响最为显著。随着全球制造业外包至劳动力成本低廉国家的趋势，大多数外资企业将中国作为加工中心，组装进口零部件，生产出口产品。这种被称为“加工贸易”的模式，由于外资可以利用中国超低廉的劳动力成本，从而降低成本，因此非常有利于外资的利益。对中国而言，外商直接投资使其成为全球对外贸易巨头。1992年，外商投资企业占中国货物贸易总额的26%，占出口总额的20%。到2012年，外商投资企业在中国货物贸易总额中的占比上升至50%。外商投资企业在进出口领域的快速增长，体现了“加工贸易”的作用。事实上，在后天安门时代，加工贸易的份额稳步上升，1996年至2006年间，加工贸易占出口总额的比例徘徊在50%至57%之间。2002年至2008年间，外商直接投资企业占中国加工贸易的75%至85%。胡锦涛时代末期，加工贸易开始略有下降。2012年，加工贸易占中国商品贸易总额的47%。





Foreign Trade and the WTO





对外贸易与世贸组织


The explosive growth of foreign trade in the post-Tiananmen era was one of the most important factors behind the Chinese economic miracle. Although China began to liberalize its foreign trade in the 1980s, the pace was greatly accelerated in the 1990s, resulting in sustained growth in that trade. The volume of merchandise trade grew more than tenfold from 1993 to 2012 due to a combination of government-initiated reforms, luck, and specific policies (table 5.5). The State Council radically liberalized foreign trade with a set of new policies in 1994, including a series of tariff reductions that brought down the average import tariffs from well over 50 percent in the early 1980s to 17 percent in 1998.61 The tariffs would be cut even further after China's entry into the WTO in 2001.62 The government also ended subsidies to exporters to create a more level playing field, lowered entry barriers to foreign trade, and made the renminbi freely convertible for the purpose of foreign trade. The government passed a new Foreign Trade Law in 1994, authorizing any company to engage in such trade if it registered with the government and could find an agent to serve as intermediary. This measure significantly increased competition in foreign trade because previously only firms approved by the government could engage in that trade. As a result of this reform, nonstate (mainly private) domestic firms gained a growing share of foreign trade. In 1992 they accounted for only 1 percent of total foreign trade (SOEs accounted for 72.5 percent). By 2000, their share had risen to 4.7 percent (compared with a SOE share of 45 percent).63 At the end of the Hu era, domestic private firms accounted for 31.6 percent of China's foreign trade, second only to the share of foreign-invested firms at 49 percent (the share of SOEs had fallen to 19.4 percent).64 In 2019 domestic private firms overtook foreign-invested firms as the largest contributor to foreign trade.65

天安门事件后对外贸易的爆炸式增长是中国经济奇迹背后最重要的因素之一。尽管中国早在20世纪80年代就开始推行对外贸易自由化，但90年代步伐显著加快，从而实现了贸易的持续增长。1993年至2012年间，商品贸易额增长超过十倍，这得益于政府主导的改革、机遇和特定政策的共同作用（表5.5）。 1994年，国务院出台一系列新政策，大幅推进对外贸易自由化，其中包括一系列关税减让措施，将平均进口关税从20世纪80年代初的50%以上降至1998年的17%。2001年中国加入世贸组织后，关税进一步下调。政府还取消了对出口商的补贴，以创造更加公平的竞争环境，降低了对外贸易的准入门槛，并允许人民币自由兑换用于对外贸易。1994年，政府颁布了新的《对外贸易法》，授权任何公司只要在政府注册并找到代理人作为中间人，即可从事对外贸易。这项措施显著加剧了对外贸易的竞争，因为此前只有获得政府批准的企业才能从事此类贸易。改革后，非国有（主要是私营）国内企业在对外贸易中占据了越来越大的份额。 1992年，民营企业仅占对外贸易总额的1%（国有企业占72.5%）。到2000年，民营企业的份额上升至4.7%（相比之下，国有企业的份额为45%）。胡锦涛时代末期，民营企业占中国对外贸易总额的31.6%，仅次于外商投资企业（49%）（国有企业的份额下降至19.4%）。2019年，民营企业超过外商投资企业，成为对外贸易的最大贡献者。

TABLE 5.5. Foreign Trade (in billion USD)

表5.5. 对外贸易（单位：十亿美元）

Source: ZGTJNJ 2013, e-book.

来源：ZGTJNJ 2013，电子书。



To promote exports, China sweetened the incentives for exporters. The new foreign exchange policy that became effective in January 1994 allowed exporters to buy and sell foreign currency freely through the banking system. Exporters could also get a rebate from the VAT on their goods, a common international practice, to be more competitive. The Export-Import Bank of China was established in 1994 to finance foreign trade. Although both increasing competition and making exports more attractive were useful, the single most effective export-promotion policy was undoubtedly the one-time major devaluation of Chinese currency in January 1994 that not only unified exchange rates but also made Chinese exports much less expensive. In 1993 the official exchange rate of the renminbi was 5.77 yuan to the dollar. In 1994, the rate was 8.7 yuan to the dollar, representing a devaluation of over 50 percent.66

为了促进出口，中国加大了对出口商的激励力度。1994年1月生效的新外汇政策允许出口商通过银行系统自由买卖外汇。此外，出口商还可以获得商品增值税退税，这是国际惯例，旨在提高竞争力。中国进出口银行于1994年成立，负责为对外贸易提供融资。尽管增强竞争和提高出口吸引力都发挥了作用，但最有效的出口促进政策无疑是1994年1月人民币的一次性大幅贬值。此次贬值不仅统一了汇率，还大幅降低了中国出口商品的价格。1993年人民币官方汇率为5.77元兑1美元。1994年，人民币兑1美元汇率为8.7元兑1美元，贬值幅度超过50%。

Taken together, these factors vaulted China to the front row of global trading nations. In 1993 China (including Hong Kong) was the world's fourth largest trading nation, with 6.1 percent of world trade. By 2012, China and Hong Kong accounted for 14 percent of global trade and claimed the number one spot.67

综合这些因素，中国一跃成为全球贸易强国。1993年，中国（包括香港）是世界第四大贸易国，占世界贸易总额的6.1%。到2012年，中国和香港的贸易额占全球贸易总额的14%，跃居榜首。

China's formal entry into the WTO in December 2001 was the most important event after Deng's southern tour in 1992 that altered the country's economic trajectory. China applied to join the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), the predecessor of the WTO, in 1987. But the country's non-market economy, protectionist trading practices, and enormous potential to disrupt global trade due to its size made it difficult for the United States and Europe to support the application. China's bid languished until the late 1990s, when Jiang Zemin and Zhu Rongji put their support behind a renewed drive to gain accession, most likely to use WTO entry to spur a new round of economic reform at home and to seek further integration with the global economy. Although Zhu personally led the critical negotiations toward the end of the process in 2000, Jiang's political support was crucial because China's trade partners were demanding many concessions as conditions for Chinese entry. The most important concession was that China had to forgo the preferential terms accorded to developing country members of the WTO. To assuage fears of a flood of Chinese exports, China also accepted the "safeguards" demanded by its key partners, such as the United States and the European Union, allowing them to take unilateral measures against Chinese exports to protect their industries.

2001年12月中国正式加入世贸组织，是继1992年邓小平南巡之后，改变中国经济发展轨迹的最重要事件。早在1987年，中国就申请加入世贸组织的前身——关税及贸易总协定（GATT）。但由于中国经济体制并非市场经济，贸易保护主义倾向严重，且其庞大的体量可能对全球贸易造成巨大冲击，因此美国和欧洲难以支持中国的申请。中国的入世进程一度停滞不前，直到20世纪90年代末，江泽民和朱镕基才重新推动入世进程。他们很可能希望借助加入世贸组织，在国内推动新一轮经济改革，并进一步融入全球经济。尽管朱镕基亲自领导了2000年入世进程最后阶段的关键谈判，但江泽民的政治支持至关重要，因为中国的贸易伙伴要求中国做出诸多让步才能加入世贸组织。最重要的让步是，中国必须放弃世贸组织给予发展中国家成员的优惠待遇。为了消除人们对中国出口产品泛滥的担忧，中国还接受了其主要伙伴（如美国和欧盟）提出的“保障措施”要求，允许它们采取单边措施限制中国出口，以保护本国产业。

The timing of China's renewed bid was propitious because President Clinton, a strong US proponent of engagement with China, saw China's accession to the WTO as a strategic opportunity to bind China closer to the West-led economic order and to advance America's own economic interests. Sensing the enormous potential of a more liberalized China market after WTO entry, corporate America furiously lobbied a skeptical Congress, which reluctantly passed a bill in late 2000 granting China permanent normal trading status to pave the way for its WTO accession.68

中国重新申请加入世贸组织的时机恰到好处，因为克林顿总统作为美国对华接触的坚定支持者，将中国加入世贸组织视为一个战略机遇，既能使中国更紧密地融入西方主导的经济秩序，又能推进美国自身的经济利益。美国企业界意识到中国加入世贸组织后市场更加自由化的巨大潜力，于是积极游说持怀疑态度的国会。最终，国会在2000年底勉强通过了一项法案，赋予中国永久正常贸易地位，为中国加入世贸组织铺平了道路。

China's entry into the WTO has remained a hotly debated issue. Geopolitically, after US-China relations turned completely adversarial toward the end of the first administration of Donald Trump, some argued that US economic engagement with China in the post-Cold War era, including support for its entry into the WTO, had been an epic strategic blunder.69 In 2023 several hard-line senators introduced legislation to strip China of its permanent normal trading status. Whether China has lived up to its commitments remains similarly controversial.70 What is not controversial is that China's WTO entry radically reshaped the landscape of global trade and supercharged its domestic economic development until the momentum dissipated toward the end of the post-Tiananmen era.

中国加入世贸组织一直是一个备受争议的话题。从地缘政治角度来看，在唐纳德·特朗普第一任期末期美中关系彻底恶化之后，一些人认为，美国在后冷战时代与中国的经济接触，包括支持中国加入世贸组织，是一个极其严重的战略失误。2023年，几位强硬派参议员提出立法，试图取消中国的永久正常贸易地位。中国是否履行了其承诺也同样存在争议。但毋庸置疑的是，中国加入世贸组织极大地重塑了全球贸易格局，并极大地促进了其国内经济发展，直到天安门事件后这种发展势头逐渐消退。

The impact of WTO accession on FDI and foreign trade was instant and dramatic as foreign investors rushed to China to take advantage of its commitments to open its domestic market for services and to build manufacturing facilities for exports. In the five years (2002-2006) immediately following WTO entry, inbound FDI grew at an annualized rate of 36 percent, averaging $59 billion a year. Even more FDI flowed into China thereafter. During 2007-2011, foreign investors poured $478 billion into China. Altogether, FDI totaled $775 billion in the first decade following China's WTO accession.71

加入世贸组织对外国直接投资和对外贸易的影响立竿见影且十分显著，外国投资者蜂拥而至，希望利用中国开放国内服务市场和建设出口制造设施的承诺。在加入世贸组织后的五年（2002-2006年）内，流入中国的外国直接投资年均增长率高达36%，平均每年达到590亿美元。此后，流入中国的外国直接投资更是大幅增长。2007年至2011年间，外国投资者向中国投入了4780亿美元。加入世贸组织后的第一个十年，外国直接投资总额达到7750亿美元。

The inflow of FDI and China's greater access to global markets granted under WTO rules precipitated explosive growth in foreign trade and, within a decade, made China (excluding Hong Kong) the world's second largest trading nation after the United States. In 2001, on the eve of China's WTO entry, its total foreign merchandise trade was $509.6 billion (exporting $266 billion in goods). A decade later, China's total merchandise trade had skyrocketed to $3.64 trillion. Its exports reached $1.9 trillion, surpassing Germany as the world's largest exporter by volume (but not by value-added).72

外国直接投资的流入以及中国根据世贸组织规则获得更广泛的全球市场准入，促使对外贸易呈爆炸式增长，并在短短十年内，使中国（不包括香港）成为仅次于美国的世界第二大贸易国。2001年，在中国加入世贸组织前夕，其商品贸易总额为5096亿美元（其中商品出口额为2660亿美元）。十年后，中国的商品贸易总额飙升至3.64万亿美元。其出口额达到1.9万亿美元，按出口量计算超过德国，成为世界最大的出口国（但按增加值计算并非如此）。

The most beneficial impact of China's WTO entry has been to make its economy more efficient and able to grow faster through three channels: an increase in foreign trade due to liberalization, a dramatic rise in FDI, and efficiency gains produced by implementation of the reforms China pledged to undertake and by the rising competition from greater access to the Chinese market by foreign manufacturers and service companies (such as retail).73 Areas more exposed to WTO entry experienced greater productivity growth due to accelerated development of the modern sector (manufacturing and services) and a more rapid shrinking of the agricultural sector.74 The magnitude of the boost in growth delivered by WTO accession is substantial but difficult to measure precisely. One study comparing China's growth performance from 2002 to 2007 with that of a group of developed and developing countries finds that accession increased China's real growth rate by 2.5 percentage points each year, implying that without WTO accession, China's average growth rate during this period would have been 8 percent, instead of 10.5 percent.75

中国加入世贸组织最积极的影响体现在三个方面：一是自由化带来的对外贸易增长；二是外国直接投资的显著增加；三是落实中国承诺的改革措施所带来的效率提升，以及外国制造商和服务企业（如零售业）更容易进入中国市场所带来的日益激烈的竞争。73 受世贸组织影响较大的地区，由于现代产业（制造业和服务业）的加速发展和农业部门的快速萎缩，生产率增长更为显著。74 加入世贸组织带来的经济增长提升幅度巨大，但难以精确衡量。一项研究对比了2002年至2007年中国与一组发达国家和发展中国家的经济增长情况，发现加入世贸组织使中国的实际增长率每年提高了2.5个百分点，这意味着如果没有加入世贸组织，中国在此期间的平均增长率将为8%，而不是10.5%。

However beneficial, WTO accession was a one-off event, and the momentum it generated gradually petered out. Instead of taking advantage of the favorable economic environment after WTO accession to implement more market-oriented reforms, the government continued to protect SOEs, maintain hidden barriers to critical sectors (such as financial services and energy), and pursue industrial policies prioritizing technological self-sufficiency.76 Debate over whether China fulfilled its accession commitments also began to surface almost immediately after it became a WTO member. Trade tensions with its key trading partners, in particular the United States, rose as Chinese exports surged and the promised economic bounties to Western firms in terms of market access failed to fully materialize. The most contentious issues were China's poor protection of Western intellectual property rights, industrial policy, and regulatory restrictions on services and agricultural imports.77

然而，加入世贸组织虽然益处良多，但毕竟只是一次性事件，其带来的发展势头逐渐消退。中国政府并未利用加入世贸组织后有利的经济环境推行更多市场导向型改革，而是继续保护国有企业，维持对关键行业（如金融服务和能源）的隐性壁垒，并奉行优先发展技术自主的产业政策。76 关于中国是否履行了其加入世贸组织承诺的争论几乎在其成为世贸组织成员后立即出现。随着中国出口激增，而承诺给予西方企业市场准入的经济优惠未能完全兑现，与主要贸易伙伴（尤其是美国）的贸易紧张局势加剧。最具争议的问题包括中国对西方知识产权保护不力、产业政策以及对服务和农产品进口的监管限制。77

Globalization might have been more beneficial for China than it was for any other developing country. But it was not all good news for the developed economies. The combination of technological progress and globalization was responsible for a significant reduction of manufacturing employment in high-income countries. Because after its WTO accession China had become the world's largest exporter of manufactured goods, and because it maintained huge trade surpluses with the advanced economies, in particular the United States, China was blamed for the loss of millions of blue-collar jobs. President Barack Obama managed to contain trade tensions with China, but China's rise as a global manufacturing superpower has had a lasting impact on America's political landscape. Research by labor economists shows that trade exposure drove American working-class voters, who had turned against globalization, to the Republican Party and put Donald Trump in the White House in 2016 (and brought him back to power in 2024).78

全球化对中国或许比对其他任何发展中国家都更有利。但对发达经济体而言，这并非全是好消息。技术进步与全球化的结合导致高收入国家的制造业就业人数大幅下降。由于中国加入世贸组织后成为全球最大的制成品出口国，并且与发达经济体（尤其是美国）保持着巨额贸易顺差，因此中国被指责为造成数百万蓝领工作岗位流失的罪魁祸首。巴拉克·奥巴马总统成功控制了与中国的贸易紧张局势，但中国崛起为全球制造业超级大国对美国的政治格局产生了深远的影响。劳动经济学家的研究表明，贸易影响促使那些原本反对全球化的美国工人阶级选民转向共和党，并在2016年将唐纳德·特朗普送入白宫（并在2024年再次助其连任）。





Strong Economic Fundamentals





强劲的经济基本面





The Demographic Dividend





人口红利


Among the strong economic fundamentals that contributed to the Chinese "economic miracle" in the post-Mao era, the so-called demographic dividend is likely the most important. "Demographic dividend" refers to the gains from a decades-long period during which a country's labor force grows more rapidly than its population, resulting in more producers than consumers. However, not all countries with a favorable population structure (a large working-age population and a relatively small population of retirees) can reap this dividend because the productive utilization of a large labor force depends crucially on appropriate government policies affecting human capital accumulation through education and healthcare, savings, investments, and trade. Countries with the right policies during this window of demographic opportunity, as the countries in East Asia had, achieve higher rates of growth than those who do not have such policies. During the 1960-2000 period, the demographic dividend in Korea, Singapore, and Thailand contributed roughly one-third of the rise of per capita income, compared with only 16 percent of the rise of per capita income in the Latin American region.79 China's population transition to an era of low birth and death rates actually began in the late 1960s. But during the Maoist era, the demographic dividend was wasted due to the radical economic policies and political turmoil. The favorable structural factors did not begin to drive economic development until the reform era.80

在后毛泽东时代中国“经济奇迹”的诸多强劲经济基本面中，所谓的“人口红利”或许是最重要的因素。“人口红利”指的是一个国家在长达数十年的时间里，劳动力增长速度超过人口增长速度，从而导致生产者多于消费者所带来的收益。然而，并非所有拥有有利人口结构（劳动年龄人口众多，退休人口相对较少）的国家都能获得这一红利，因为庞大劳动力的生产性利用在很大程度上取决于政府制定的、能够通过教育和医疗保健、储蓄、投资和贸易等途径促进人力资本积累的政策。那些在人口红利时期采取了正确政策的国家，例如东亚国家，其经济增长速度往往高于那些没有采取此类政策的国家。 1960年至2000年间，韩国、新加坡和泰国的人口红利贡献了人均收入增长的约三分之一，而拉丁美洲地区仅贡献了人均收入增长的16%。中国向低出生率和低死亡率时代的转型实际上始于20世纪60年代末。但在毛泽东时代，由于激进的经济政策和政治动荡，人口红利被浪费了。直到改革开放时期，有利的结构性因素才开始推动经济发展。

A population with low dependency ratios (more workers than both the old-age and young populations) contributes to economic development through two mechanisms. The first is the accumulation of savings due to the low dependency ratio and the extra savings that can fund investments in physical and human capital. The second mechanism is the development of capital markets because workers need to save for their retirement and thus require a more sophisticated financial system.81

人口抚养比低（劳动人口多于老年人口和青年人口）通过两种机制促进经济发展。第一种机制是低抚养比带来的储蓄积累，以及可用于投资物质资本和人力资本的额外储蓄。第二种机制是资本市场的发展，因为劳动者需要为退休储蓄，因此需要更完善的金融体系。

Evidence of China's population transition can be seen in the dramatic fall in its birth rate starting in the mid-1960s. The country's birth rate peaked at 4.3 percent in 1963. By 1969, the birth rate had fallen to 3.4 percent, and in the 1970s the birth rate averaged 2.4 percent per year.82 The sustained lower birth rate coupled with the low mortality, following a period of high birth and low mortality rates (the 1950s and early 1960s), resulted in a population structure with a low dependency ratio. According to the 1990 census, China's working-age population was 60 percent of its 1.13 billion people, while its old-age population (age 60 for men and 55 for women) was only 10 percent of the population, making the old-age dependency ratio 6 to 1 (six workers supporting one retiree). Those under 14 years of age accounted for 28 percent of the total population. So the total dependency ratio was slightly less than 3 to 1.83 Studies of the magnitude of the effect of China's demographic dividend on economic growth show a substantial positive impact. One frequently cited article estimates that between 1982 and 2000, the demographic dividend contributed about 27 percent of China's per capita GDP growth. Another study finds that changes in the age structure of the Chinese population added about 20 percent to its per capita GDP growth between 1990 and 2005.84

中国人口转型的一个显著特征是其出生率自20世纪60年代中期开始急剧下降。1963年，中国的出生率达到峰值4.3%。到1969年，出生率已降至3.4%，70年代的平均出生率为每年2.4%。在经历了高出生率和低死亡率时期（20世纪50年代和60年代初）之后，持续的低出生率和低死亡率共同造就了中国低抚养比的人口结构。根据1990年的人口普查，中国11.3亿人口中，劳动年龄人口占60%，而老年人口（男性60岁，女性55岁）仅占10%，老年抚养比为6:1（六名劳动人口赡养一名退休人员）。 14岁以下人口占总人口的28%。因此，总抚养比略低于3:1。83 对中国人口红利对经济增长影响程度的研究表明，其具有显著的积极影响。一篇被广泛引用的文章估计，1982年至2000年间，人口红利对中国人均GDP增长的贡献约为27%。另一项研究发现，1990年至2005年间，中国人口年龄结构的变化使其人均GDP增长增加了约20%。84

One unique characteristic of China's demographic dividend is the massive transfer of surplus labor from rural areas to the cities. This process was set in motion in the 1980s by the decollectivization of agriculture, which raised productivity in the agricultural sector significantly and freed up a huge pool of surplus labor. In the 1980s the rural surplus labor was transferred mainly to the TVEs. Starting in the 1990s the boom in coastal areas and large cities attracted even more rural laborers who were migrating from villages to urban areas where they could earn higher wages in manufacturing, construction, and services. Estimates vary about the exact number of rural laborers transferred from the agricultural sector to manufacturing and services. The National Bureau of Statistics reports that 268.9 million rural laborers had transferred to the modern sector by the end of 2013.85

中国人口红利的一个独特特征是大量剩余劳动力从农村向城市转移。这一过程始于20世纪80年代的农业非集体化，农业生产率显著提高，释放出大量剩余劳动力。20世纪80年代，农村剩余劳动力主要转移到了乡镇企业。从20世纪90年代开始，沿海地区和大城市的繁荣吸引了更多农村劳动力从农村涌入城市，在制造业、建筑业和服务业中获得更高的工资。关于从农业部门转移到制造业和服务业的农村劳动力的具体人数，各方估计不一。国家统计局报告称，截至2013年底，已有2.689亿农村劳动力转移到现代部门。

The infusion of a labor force that was larger than the population of most countries into manufacturing and services enabled China to keep wages low and maintain its competitiveness. More important, because the transfer of labor from a sector in which labor productivity is low to one in which one unit of labor can produce more value delivers a one-time improvement in labor productivity. The epic transfer of hundreds of millions of rural laborers to the modern sector in the post-Mao era (with most of this transfer taking place in the post-Tiananmen era due to the relaxation of restrictions on internal migration) accounted for a significant rise in productivity.86 Estimates of the one-off boost in productivity due to the transfer of labor from less productive sectors (agriculture and SOEs) vary. According to one study, labor transfers from agriculture to nonagricultural sectors during 1978-1998 contributed about one-fifth of per capita GDP growth in China. Another study shows that relocating labor from agriculture to the nonagricultural sectors during 1991-2003 accounted for roughly 26 percent of Chinese growth in labor productivity. For the 1978-2015 period, the transfer of labor from less productive sectors to more productive sectors was responsible for 45 percent of the increase in labor productivity.87

中国向制造业和服务业注入了比大多数国家人口规模还要庞大的劳动力，这使得中国能够保持低工资水平并维持其竞争力。更重要的是，劳动力从劳动生产率低的部门转移到劳动生产率高的部门，能够一次性提高劳动生产率。后毛泽东时代数亿农村劳动力向现代部门的大规模转移（其中大部分发生在天安门事件后，因为当时放宽了对国内人口流动的限制）显著提高了生产率。86 关于劳动力从生产率较低的部门（农业和国有企业）转移所带来的生产率一次性提升的估计值各不相同。一项研究表明，1978年至1998年间，劳动力从农业向非农业部门的转移约占中国人均GDP增长的五分之一。另一项研究表明，1991年至2003年间，劳动力从农业向非农业部门的转移约占中国劳动生产率增长的26%。而在1978年至2015年期间，劳动力从生产率较低的部门向生产率较高的部门的转移则贡献了劳动生产率增长的45%。

However, China's demographic window of opportunity began to close toward the end of the post-Tiananmen era. By 2012, the country had reached the "Lewis Turning Point," whereby rural surplus labor was exhausted and wages were beginning to rise rapidly.88 Due to the party's draconian one-child policy, which restricted urban families to one child and rural families to two, China quickly confronted a far more adverse demographic landscape—low birth rates and a rapid rise in aging—in the 2010s. In 1990 the total dependency ratio was 3 to 1. But the population structure indicates a continuation of the demographic dividend because roughly two-thirds of dependents were under age 15 and the elderly population constituted only 9 percent of the working population. By 2012, the share of the population under age 14 had fallen to 223 million (compared with 323 million in 1992), while the number of those aged 65 and above had risen to 127 million (in 1992 there were 72 million people in this age-group), raising the old-age population dependency ratio to nearly 13 percent.89 Therefore, demographic aging began to act as a drag on future economic growth.

然而，中国的“人口红利窗口”在后天安门时代末期开始关闭。到2012年，中国达到了“路易斯转折点”，农村剩余劳动力消耗殆尽，工资开始快速上涨。由于中共严苛的独生子女政策（限制城镇家庭只能生育一个孩子，农村家庭只能生育两个孩子），中国在2010年代迅速面临着更为严峻的人口形势——低出生率和人口老龄化加剧。1990年，总抚养比为3:1。但人口结构表明人口红利仍在延续，因为大约三分之二的受抚养人口年龄在15岁以下，老年人口仅占劳动人口的9%。到2012年，14岁以下人口的比例下降到2.23亿（1992年为3.23亿），而65岁及以上人口的数量上升到1.27亿（1992年该年龄段人口为7200万），使老年人口抚养比上升到近13%。因此，人口老龄化开始对未来的经济增长构成阻碍。





High Savings and Investments





高储蓄和投资


The positive impact of the demographic dividend on China's growth in the post-Mao period is a much less disputed factor than the role of savings and investment. Like other fast-growing economies in East Asia, the story of the Chinese "economic miracle" also features high savings and investment rates. As an influential World Bank study of the East Asian development experience argues, high savings and high investment rates were the most important factors behind the region's post-World War II developmental success.90 Even those economists who maintain that there was no such thing as an economic miracle in East Asia acknowledge that high investment rates made the region an economic development star after World War II.91

人口红利对后毛泽东时代中国经济增长的积极影响远比储蓄和投资的作用更具争议性。与其他东亚快速增长的经济体一样，中国“经济奇迹”的故事也离不开高储蓄率和高投资率。正如世界银行一份关于东亚发展经验的重要研究报告所指出的，高储蓄率和高投资率是该地区二战后发展成功的最重要因素。即使是那些认为东亚不存在所谓“经济奇迹”的经济学家也承认，高投资率使该地区在二战后成为经济发展的明星。

Not surprisingly, economists examining the sources of growth in post-Mao China also disagree on whether an increase in total factor productivity (TFP) or an increase in investment played a more important role in the Chinese economic miracle. Some insist that TFP growth in the private sector and agriculture after reform began accounted for most of the increase in per capita GDP growth because the state sector, which had invested more than half of the capital during the period covered by the study (1978-2007), wasted a significant amount of its investment.92 Other economists, however, give more credit to investment. One study covering the 1978-2004 period finds that investment contributed 44 percent of the output of each worker, and TFP accounted for 49 percent. Another study examining the sources of growth during the 1978-2005 period produces similar results.93

不出所料，研究后毛泽东时代中国经济增长来源的经济学家们对于全要素生产率（TFP）的提高还是投资的增加在中国经济奇迹中发挥了更重要的作用存在分歧。一些经济学家坚持认为，改革开放后私营部门和农业的全要素生产率增长是人均GDP增长的主要贡献者，因为在研究涵盖的时期（1978-2007年）内投资超过一半资本的国有部门浪费了大量投资。然而，另一些经济学家则更看重投资。一项涵盖1978-2004年的研究发现，投资贡献了每位劳动者产出的44%，而全要素生产率贡献了49%。另一项研究1978-2005年期间经济增长来源的研究也得出了类似的结果。

At the heart of this esoteric debate is the sustainability of China's growth. If China's growth is driven primarily by investment and not by growth in productivity, it will eventually grind to a halt because of the law of diminishing returns (each additional unit of investment will produce less of an increase in output). But if China's growth is due more to rising productivity than it is to investment, its growth will be more sustainable.

这场深奥辩论的核心在于中国经济增长的可持续性。如果中国经济增长主要由投资而非生产率增长驱动，那么最终会因边际效益递减规律（每增加一个单位的投资，产出增长幅度都会递减）而停滞不前。但如果中国经济增长更多地源于生产率的提高而非投资，那么其增长将更具可持续性。

What is not disputed, however, are the sustained high levels of savings and investment in the post-Tiananmen era. Even though the sources of growth—whether productivity growth or high investments—will remain a subject of academic debate, the undeniable fact is that China could not have achieved its sustained high growth without an abundant source of capital. As table 5.6 shows, its savings and investment rates were extremely high throughout the post-Tiananmen period, reaching a peak toward the end of the Hu era.

然而，无可争议的是，后天安门时代中国持续保持着高水平的储蓄和投资。尽管增长的来源——无论是生产率增长还是高投资——仍将是学术界争论的话题，但不可否认的事实是，如果没有充裕的资本来源，中国不可能实现持续的高速增长。如表5.6所示，后天安门时代中国的储蓄和投资率一直居高不下，并在胡锦涛时代末期达到顶峰。

TABLE 5.6. Savings and Investment Rates (as a share of GDP)

表 5.6. 储蓄率和投资率（占 GDP 的比重）

Source: World Bank, https://databank.worldbank.org/source/world-development-indicators#.

资料来源：世界银行，https://databank.worldbank.org/source/world-development-indicators#。



Even compared with its neighbors in East Asia that are known for high savings and investment rates, China stands out during this period. In the Jiang era, its savings rate was 25 percent more than the regional average, and its investment rate was 12 percent higher. This gap would grow even further in the Hu era. On average, China saved a whopping 43 percent more than its neighbors and invested 35 percent more.94 China was able to maintain high rates of investment mainly because of its abundant domestic savings, not because of FDI. Although utilized FDI totaled $1.24 trillion during 1993-2012, it was only a fraction of China's total investment. In 2012 alone, China invested $5.3 trillion in fixed assets. In the same year, inbound FDI was $111 billion, roughly 2 percent of total fixed asset investments.95

即使与以高储蓄率和高投资率著称的东亚邻国相比，中国在这一时期也表现突出。江泽民时期，中国的储蓄率比区域平均水平高出25%，投资率高出12%。到了胡锦涛时期，这一差距进一步扩大。平均而言，中国的储蓄率比邻国高出惊人的43%，投资率高出35%。中国之所以能够保持高投资率，主要得益于其充裕的国内储蓄，而非外商直接投资。尽管1993年至2012年间，中国利用的外商直接投资总额达1.24万亿美元，但这仅占中国总投资的一小部分。仅2012年一年，中国在固定资产上的投资就高达5.3万亿美元。同年，流入的外商直接投资为1110亿美元，约占固定资产投资总额的2%。

The reasons for China's high savings rate are not only hotly debated but also reflective of some of the flaws in the Chinese political and economic systems. In terms of the positive factors contributing to high savings, the most obvious is the combination of high growth and the demographic dividend. China experienced a virtuous cycle during most of the reform era—the reforms increased productivity and growth, resulting in higher income. Reinforced by the demographic dividend, more income was saved.96 Another factor is simply rational human behavior. According to the life-cycle hypothesis, people save when their income is high so they will have money to spend when they have no income. Indeed, China's reform and opening produced higher growth and hence higher income, and as a result individuals rationally saved more.97 This explanation is intuitively persuasive, but it does not address the unique and largely adverse circumstances in China's transitional economy during the post-Mao era. One casualty of the reforms is the (limited) socialist welfare state and the employment security of workers in urban areas. Uncertainty about future income in a transition economy motivated Chinese households to save more.98 The theory of "precautionary savings" appears to make more sense in the Chinese context because, during much of the reform era, China did not provide sufficient social services (such as publicly funded healthcare or education) or a social safety net (pensions or unemployment insurance), forcing individuals to set aside a portion of their income for such future expenditures. Another factor unique to China that also forced people to save more was the high housing prices that motivated potential home purchasers to save for down payments.99

中国高储蓄率的原因不仅引发了激烈的争论，也反映了中国政治经济体制的一些缺陷。就促成高储蓄率的积极因素而言，最显而易见的是高增长和人口红利的结合。在改革开放的大部分时期，中国经历了良性循环——改革提高了生产力和经济增长，从而带来了更高的收入。人口红利的推动下，更多的收入被储蓄起来。另一个因素则简单来说就是理性的人类行为。根据生命周期假说，人们会在收入高的时候储蓄，以便在没有收入时有钱消费。事实上，中国的改革开放带来了更高的经济增长，从而带来了更高的收入，因此人们理性地增加了储蓄。这种解释在直觉上很有说服力，但它并没有考虑到后毛泽东时代中国转型经济所面临的独特且大多不利的境况。改革的牺牲品之一是（有限的）社会主义福利国家和城镇工人的就业保障。转型经济体中未来收入的不确定性促使中国家庭增加储蓄。98 “预防性储蓄”理论在中国似乎更具意义，因为在改革开放的大部分时期，中国缺乏充足的社会服务（例如公共医疗或教育）和社会保障体系（例如养老金或失业保险），迫使个人将部分收入用于应对未来的支出。另一个促使人们增加储蓄的中国特有因素是高房价，这促使潜在购房者为首付储蓄。99

Although high domestic savings are critical to funding China's massive investment in infrastructure, alone they cannot sustain its economic development. Savings are expected to fall as China exhausts its demographic dividend and must provide for its rapidly aging society. If savings are not productively invested, they will not generate sufficient returns to cover pensions. The latter probably is far more challenging because China's state-dominated financial system and capital controls (which prevent Chinese households from investing abroad) limit investment options and potential returns. Instructively, the only class of assets that appears to have generated high returns is housing, in contrast to the equity market that has not delivered any returns despite its high volatility between 2008 and 2016.100

尽管高额的国内储蓄对于中国大规模的基础设施投资至关重要，但仅靠储蓄本身无法支撑其经济发展。随着中国人口红利的耗尽以及必须应对快速老龄化的社会，储蓄预计将会下降。如果储蓄没有得到有效投资，其收益将不足以支付养老金。后者可能更具挑战性，因为中国以国家为主导的金融体系和资本管制（限制了中国家庭在海外的投资）限制了投资选择和潜在收益。值得注意的是，唯一似乎产生高回报的资产类别是房地产，而股票市场尽管在2008年至2016年期间波动剧烈，却没有带来任何回报。





Losing Momentum





失去势头


No one was in a better position to sound the alarm about the Chinese economy than China's premier, the country's chief economic manager. While the rest of the world was admiring China's economic miracle, Premier Wen Jiabao, uncharacteristically frank for a senior party official, told journalists at a press conference after the conclusion of the annual session of the NPC in March 2007 that the Chinese economy had "huge" (juda) problems—"the same persistent problems of instability, imbalances, lack of coordination, and unsustainability." In particular, Wen singled out the excessive investment growth rate, amount of credit, and liquidity; the large imbalances in foreign trade and the current account and between investment and consumption; excessive dependence on investment and exports to generate growth; and unsustainable environmental degradation.101 When he delivered his work report to the NPC in March 2013 before retiring as premier, he reiterated his warning that economic imbalances, lack of coordination, and unsustainability continued to be prominent problems.102

没有人比中国总理、国家首席经济管理者更有资格对中国经济发出警告。当世界其他国家都在赞叹中国的经济奇迹时，温家宝总理——一位罕见的、不拘泥于传统高官作风的总理——在2007年3月全国人大年度会议闭幕后的记者会上告诉记者，中国经济存在“巨大”问题——“同样是长期存在的不稳定、失衡、缺乏协调、不可持续的问题”。温家宝特别指出，中国经济存在投资增速过快、信贷规模过大、流动性过强等问题；外贸和经常账户以及投资与消费之间存在巨大失衡；过度依赖投资和出口来推动经济增长；以及不可持续的环境恶化。101 2013年3月，他在卸任国务院总理前向全国人大作工作报告时，重申了经济失衡、缺乏协调和不可持续性仍然是突出的问题。102

The premier's warning reveals the weaknesses of China's economic development model in the post-Tiananmen era. Even though the party delivered two decades of spectacular growth, exceeding its own expectations, many of the factors that contributed to this economic miracle either were one-off or began to yield diminishing returns toward the end of the Hu era. If the party had adopted substantive reforms to correct these imbalances when Wen first sounded the alarm in 2007, the Chinese economy would likely have been in better shape than it was when Hu and Wen left office in 2012/2013.

总理的警告揭示了后天安门时代中国经济发展模式的缺陷。尽管中共实现了长达二十年的辉煌增长，远超预期，但促成这一经济奇迹的诸多因素要么是一次性的，要么在胡锦涛时代末期开始逐渐失效。如果中共在温家宝2007年首次发出警告时就采取实质性改革措施纠正这些失衡，那么中国经济在胡锦涛和温家宝2012/2013年卸任时，状况很可能会更好。

But that did not happen. Instead of addressing the worsening macro-economic imbalances through reform, the party under Hu merely rode the momentum generated by China's WTO entry, the housing boom, and the demographic dividend. When the global financial crisis (GFC) of 2008 hit, the leadership reacted with a massive credit-fueled stimulus package that avoided a recession over the short term. But the price was high. The party's panicked response to the GFC drastically increased the overall level of debt in the economy and led to a gigantic housing bubble. This credit-fueled investment cycle began to unwind around 2021 when the housing bubble popped and local government debt threatened to unleash a financial crisis. In retrospect, the party's stimulus package at the end of the Hu era merely delayed China's economic reckoning.

但这种情况并未发生。胡锦涛领导下的中共并未通过改革解决日益恶化的宏观经济失衡问题，而是仅仅依靠中国加入世贸组织、房地产繁荣和人口红利带来的发展势头。2008年全球金融危机爆发时，领导层采取了大规模信贷驱动的刺激计划，短期内避免了经济衰退。但代价高昂。中共对金融危机的恐慌性反应导致经济整体债务水平急剧上升，并催生了巨大的房地产泡沫。大约在2021年，随着房地产泡沫破裂和地方政府债务可能引发金融危机，这种信贷驱动的投资周期开始瓦解。回首来看，胡锦涛时代末期的刺激计划只不过是推迟了中国经济的清算。





Macroeconomic Imbalances and Falling Productivity





宏观经济失衡与生产率下降


By the end of the Hu era, most economic indicators were flashing yellow, or even red, signaling the end of the Chinese economic miracle. GDP recorded its last double-digit growth rate (10.3 percent) in 2010. Growth would fall to 6.4 percent in 2019, the year before the Covid-19 pandemic.103 Judging by the structure of the Chinese economy, growth had become excessively dependent on investment (table 5.7). An economy that relies too much on one of the three drivers of growth—consumption, investment, and trade—can become vulnerable if this main driver loses momentum. In the Chinese case, the economy was most balanced in the 1980s, when Zhao Ziyang was the premier in charge of it. Consumption contributed, on average, 64 percent of the growth, and investment accounted for 31 percent. The ratio began to shift toward investment in the Jiang era, during which time foreign trade also claimed a much higher share of the source of growth. Nicholas Lardy, a leading authority on the Chinese economy, argues that macroeconomic data show that the Chinese economy became "highly imbalanced" in about 2003, the year Hu began his decade in power.104

胡锦涛时代末期，大多数经济指标都亮起了黄灯，甚至红灯，预示着中国经济奇迹的终结。2010年，国内生产总值（GDP）录得其最后一次两位数增长（10.3%）。到2019年，也就是新冠疫情爆发前一年，增速将降至6.4%。从中国经济结构来看，经济增长过度依赖投资（表5.7）。如果一个经济体过度依赖消费、投资和贸易这三大增长动力中的任何一个，一旦该主要动力失去动力，经济体就会变得脆弱。就中国而言，经济在20世纪80年代最为平衡，当时赵紫阳担任总理。消费平均贡献了64%的增长，投资占31%。江泽民时代，这一比例开始向投资倾斜，与此同时，对外贸易在经济增长中所占的份额也大幅增加。中国经济权威专家尼古拉斯·拉迪认为，宏观经济数据显示，中国经济在2003年左右开始出现“高度失衡”，而那一年正是胡锦涛开始执政的十年时期。

At the end of the Hu era, the economy was less dependent on trade, as the contribution of trade to growth had fallen to 3.4 percent, most probably due to the decline in external demand following the GFC. But the domestic imbalances in the economy deteriorated, with investment contributing on average 52.4 percent of the growth during Hu's decade in power and consumption falling to 44.2 percent. Data from Hu's second term reveal even worse imbalances. During 2008-2012 investment accounted for an average of 56.5 percent of GDP growth, while trade brought down 6.2 percent of the growth because of the slump in world trade after the 2008 GFC.105

胡锦涛执政末期，中国经济对贸易的依赖程度有所降低，贸易对经济增长的贡献率降至3.4%，这很可能是由于全球金融危机后外部需求下降所致。但国内经济失衡状况恶化，胡锦涛执政十年间，投资对经济增长的贡献率平均为52.4%，而消费支出则降至44.2%。胡锦涛第二任期的数据显示，经济失衡状况更为严重。2008年至2012年间，投资对GDP增长的贡献率平均为56.5%，而贸易增长的贡献率仅为6.2%，这主要是由于2008年全球金融危机后世界贸易低迷所致。

An economy overly reliant on investment as a source of growth faces two problems. First, investment typically yields diminishing returns: More capital is needed to generate an additional unit of output. This phenomenon is usually captured by the term "incremental capital output ratio" (ICOR). This ratio measures the unit of capital needed to generate an additional unit of output. Higher ICOR numbers indicate a greater need for capital investment to sustain growth. One estimate shows that China's average ICOR was 3.6 during 1983-1992, 4.0 during 1993-2002, and 4.3 during 2003-2012. Although it is debatable whether China's ICOR is too high, the upward trend is self-evident. In the Xi period, China's ICOR would rise even more rapidly (averaging 5.8 in 2010-2019).106 A more nuanced analysis of China's rising ICOR finds that capital-intensive housing and infrastructure investment accounted for the bulk of this increase.107 This explanation contains both good news and bad news. The positive interpretation is that China may have room to invest in the more productive sectors of the economy, such as manufacturing and services. The bad news is that the two engines behind the country's economic miracle—infrastructure and housing—cannot be sustained due to their high capital intensity coupled with their lower returns.

过度依赖投资作为增长动力的经济体面临两个问题。首先，投资通常会产生边际效益递减：需要更多的资本才能创造额外的一单位产出。这种现象通常用“增量资本产出比”（ICOR）来描述。该比率衡量的是创造额外一单位产出所需的资本量。ICOR 值越高，表明维持增长所需的资本投资就越多。据估计，中国 1983-1992 年的平均 ICOR 为 3.6，1993-2002 年为 4.0，2003-2012 年为 4.3。尽管中国的 ICOR 是否过高尚存争议，但其上升趋势显而易见。在习近平时期，中国的资本密集型资本回报率（ICOR）增长速度更快（2010-2019年平均为5.8）。对中国ICOR增长的更细致分析发现，资本密集型的住房和基础设施投资是这一增长的主要来源。这种解释既有好消息也有坏消息。好消息是，中国或许有空间投资于生产率更高的经济部门，例如制造业和服务业。坏消息是，支撑中国经济奇迹的两大引擎——基础设施和住房——由于其高资本密集度和低回报率，难以持续。

Second, excessive investment raises the risk of waste. High investment can lead to excess capacity, a chronic problem plaguing industries such as coal, steel, automobile, construction, and solar panels in China.108 If SOEs undertake investment, the return on capital is much lower than it is in the private sector (private firms produced returns on capital that were roughly 50 percent higher than returns on capital in SOEs during the 2000s). Indeed, Chinese SOEs consistently have higher debt and report far lower returns on invested capital than do private and foreign firms. In the second half of the Hu period, the performance of SOEs relative to private and foreign firms became even worse. During the entire Hu period, SOEs recorded losses averaging 0.5 percent of GDP each year, indicating an inefficient use of capital.109

其次，过度投资会增加浪费的风险。高投资会导致产能过剩，这是困扰中国煤炭、钢铁、汽车、建筑和太阳能电池板等行业的长期问题。如果国有企业进行投资，其资本回报率远低于私营部门（2000年代，私营企业的资本回报率比国有企业高出约50%）。事实上，中国国有企业的负债水平一直高于私营企业和外资企业，且投资回报率远低于后者。在胡锦涛执政时期后半段，国有企业相对于私营企业和外资企业的业绩进一步恶化。在整个胡锦涛执政时期，国有企业平均每年亏损0.5%的GDP，表明资本利用效率低下。

TABLE 5.7. Contributions to GDP Growth (%)

表 5.7. 对 GDP 增长的贡献率（%）

Note: Average contributions during each period.

注：各时期平均贡献额。

Sources: ZGTJNJ 2008 (Beijing: Zhongguo tongji chubanshe, 2009), 57; ZGTJNJ 2013, e-book.

Sources: ZGTJNJ 2008 (Beijing: Zhongguo tongji chubanshe, 2009), 57; ZGTJNJ 2013, e-book.



In addition to dramatic structural imbalances and a rising capital intensity, a third indicator of the flagging economic momentum that appeared at the end of the Hu era is the slowing of productivity. One study of the sources of growth during the post-Mao period indicates that the increase in TFP accounted for 20 percent or more of the growth of output before 2008. However, the contribution of TFP to GDP growth became negative after 2009.110 Another study shows that the contribution to GDP growth from the rise in TFP averaged 15 percent from 1980 to 2007, but TFP did not contribute to GDP growth from 2007 to 2012; in fact, TFP growth itself was negative in this period, implying declining economic efficiency.111 Several factors likely led to the fall in productivity during the second half of the Hu era. The principal culprits were the party's failure to adopt more reforms to improve economic efficiency and its massive stimulus package in response to the GFC that channeled investments into the inefficient state sector and the unproductive infrastructure.112

除了严重的结构性失衡和资本密集度上升之外，胡时代末期经济增长势头减弱的第三个指标是生产率增速放缓。一项对后毛泽东时代经济增长来源的研究表明，2008年以前，全要素生产率（TFP）的增长占产出增长的20%以上。然而，2009年以后，TFP对GDP增长的贡献转为负值。另一项研究表明，1980年至2007年，TFP增长对GDP增长的平均贡献率为15%，但2007年至2012年，TFP对GDP增长没有贡献；事实上，在此期间TFP本身的增长为负值，这意味着经济效率下降。胡时代后半期生产率下降可能由多种因素造成。主要原因在于该党未能采取更多改革措施来提高经济效率，以及其为应对全球金融危机而推出的大规模刺激计划，该计划将投资导向了效率低下的国有部门和生产力低下的基础设施。





Party Response to Global Financial Crisis in 2008





2008年全球金融危机期间，该党的应对措施


The GFC occurred at a time when the Chinese economy was at a crossroads. Its economic structure had become even more unbalanced than when Hu began as premier six years earlier. In 2007 consumption and investment contributed 40 percent to GDP growth, respectively, while foreign trade, due to China's whopping trade surplus of $261.8 billion, accounted for 20 percent. The boom in foreign trade following China's WTO entry made the Chinese economy heavily dependent on exports prior to the GFC. The positive effects of China's WTO entry took about three years to show up in China's trade data, most likely because of the time lag between the relocation of manufacturing facilities to China and their exports. During 2002-2004 foreign trade contributed an average of only 5 percent of GDP growth. But between 2005 and 2007 it accounted for an average of 21 percent of growth.113

全球金融危机爆发时，中国经济正处于十字路口。其经济结构比胡锦涛六年前就任总理时更加失衡。2007年，消费和投资分别对GDP增长贡献了40%，而由于中国高达2618亿美元的贸易顺差，外贸仅占20%。中国加入世贸组织后外贸的蓬勃发展，使得中国经济在金融危机爆发前严重依赖出口。中国加入世贸组织的积极影响大约三年后才体现在中国的贸易数据中，这很可能是因为制造业设施迁至中国与其出口之间存在时间滞后。2002年至2004年，外贸对GDP增长的贡献平均仅为5%。但2005年至2007年，外贸对GDP增长的贡献平均达到21%。

Due to tight regulations and capital controls, the Chinese financial system was insulated from the turmoil in global financial markets. However, China's foreign trade immediately felt the impact of the GFC as demand for Chinese exports in the crisis-ridden Western economies declined dramatically. In response, the party rolled out a massive stimulus package to avoid a recession. This package consisted of two sources of funding. The fiscal spending that was announced in November 2008 amounted to 4 trillion yuan (about $486 billion, or 14 percent of GDP). Most of the stimulus targeted infrastructure projects. Despite its nominally large size, it is difficult to determine the actual amount of the fiscal stimulus because cash-strapped local governments were supposed to cover the bulk of the spending.114 The other source of funding was bank loans, which provided most of the stimulus. Between December 2008 and December 2009 alone, Chinese banks lent out 11 trillion yuan in new loans, almost triple the amount of the announced fiscal stimulus.115

由于严格的监管和资本管制，中国金融体系免受全球金融市场动荡的影响。然而，随着危机重重的西方经济体对中国出口产品的需求急剧下降，中国的对外贸易立即感受到了全球金融危机的冲击。为了应对危机，中共推出了一项大规模的经济刺激计划，以避免经济衰退。该计划包含两个资金来源。2008年11月宣布的财政支出总额达4万亿元人民币（约合4860亿美元，占GDP的14%）。大部分刺激资金用于基础设施建设项目。尽管名义规模庞大，但由于资金紧张的地方政府需要承担大部分支出，因此很难确定财政刺激的实际金额。另一个资金来源是银行贷款，这提供了大部分刺激资金。仅在2008年12月至2009年12月期间，中国银行业就发放了11万亿元人民币的新贷款，几乎是宣布的财政刺激金额的三倍。

Judging by China's macroeconomic performance in the immediate aftermath of the GFC, the party appears to have made the right call. Exports in 2009 fell 16 percent from 2008, but they recovered strongly in 2010. Nevertheless, the GFC marked the end of China's export-driven growth. Foreign trade was a negative contributor to growth between 2008 and 2011, and it would not resume its role as an engine of growth until 2019.116 The injection of massive credit into the economy did succeed in achieving the party's goal of maintaining growth. In 2008 the country reported growth of 9.6 percent (a significant fall from the 14.2 percent growth in 2007). Growth in 2009 and 2010 was 9.2 and 10.4 percent, respectively.117

从中国在全球金融危机后的宏观经济表现来看，党的决策似乎是正确的。2009年出口较2008年下降了16%，但2010年强劲反弹。然而，全球金融危机标志着中国出口导向型增长时代的终结。2008年至2011年间，外贸对经济增长产生了负面影响，直到2019年才重新成为经济增长的引擎。向经济注入大量信贷确实成功实现了党维持增长的目标。2008年，中国经济增长率为9.6%（较2007年的14.2%大幅下降）。2009年和2010年的经济增长率分别为9.2%和10.4%。

Even though some economists hailed the party's response, in retrospect it was a costly mistake that led to a rapid buildup of debt in the economy, a worsening misallocation of resources, and the subsequent decline in productivity.118 Arguably the greatest—and most negative—legacy of China's response to the GFC is the rapid increase in debt. According to the Bank of International Settlements, the debt of China's nonfinancial sector averaged 140 percent of GDP from 2000 to 2008 (it was 139 percent of GDP at the end of 2008). But the debt of the nonfinancial sector reached 175 percent of GDP at the end of 2009, a net increase of 36 percentage points. This implies that China's credit-fueled stimulus package was more than one-third of its GDP—probably the largest in peacetime history. Although the pace of credit slowed in 2010 and 2011, by the time Hu left his position as CCP general secretary at the end of 2012, total outstanding debt had risen to 192 percent of GDP, a historic record. Judging by the sustained buildup of debt in the Xi era, as will be discussed later, the party's debt-driven stimulus seems to have opened the door for Xi, during his first term, to rely on credit expansion to keep growth from falling from a cliff as a substitute for reform. (Debt to GDP would reach 297 percent by the end of Xi's second term in December 2022.)119

尽管一些经济学家称赞了中共的应对措施，但事后看来，这是一个代价惨重的错误，导致经济债务迅速累积、资源错配加剧，并最终导致生产率下降。可以说，中国应对全球金融危机的最大——也是最负面的——遗产就是债务的迅速增长。根据国际清算银行的数据，2000年至2008年，中国非金融部门的债务平均占GDP的140%（2008年底为139%）。但到2009年底，非金融部门的债务占GDP的比例达到了175%，净增36个百分点。这意味着，中国以信贷驱动的刺激计划规模超过了其GDP的三分之一——这可能是和平时期历史上规模最大的刺激计划。尽管2010年和2011年信贷增速放缓，但到胡锦涛2012年底卸任中共中央总书记时，未偿债务总额已升至GDP的192%，创历史新高。正如后文将要讨论的，从习近平时代债务的持续增长来看，中共以债务驱动的刺激政策似乎为习近平在其第一任期内提供了便利，使其能够依靠信贷扩张来避免经济增长断崖式下滑，以此替代改革。（到习近平第二任期结束时，即2022年12月，债务占GDP的比重将达到297%。）

The rapid buildup of debt most likely created a large amount of nonperforming loans because SOEs and local governments had borrowed the bulk of the new credit created in 2009.120 Researchers at the International Monetary Fund estimate that half of the new credit made available after 2008 went to SOEs.121 Of all the outstanding debt to the nonfinancial sectors at the end of 2012, SOEs and local government financing vehicles (LGFVs) accounted for 37 percent.122 Because inefficient SOEs do not generate enough profits to repay their loans and local governments frequently invest in wasteful projects, relying on revenue from the leasing of land to cover their financial liabilities, it is reasonable to assume that a significant portion of the borrowing after the GFC ended up as nonperforming loans in the financial system. In addition to misallocating massive amounts of resources to inefficient producers and dragging down productivity, the party's response to the GFC limited the space for future monetary policy and made the financial sector more vulnerable to a debt crisis.

债务的迅速累积很可能造成了大量不良贷款，因为国有企业和地方政府借入了2009年新增信贷的大部分。国际货币基金组织的研究人员估计，2008年后新增信贷的一半流向了国有企业。截至2012年底，非金融部门所有未偿债务中，国有企业和地方政府融资机构（LGFV）占37%。由于效率低下的国有企业无法产生足够的利润来偿还贷款，而地方政府经常投资于浪费性项目，依靠土地租赁收入来偿还债务，因此可以合理地假设，全球金融危机后相当一部分借款最终变成了金融体系中的不良贷款。除了将大量资源错误地分配给效率低下的生产商并拉低生产力之外，该党对全球金融危机的应对措施限制了未来货币政策的空间，并使金融部门更容易受到债务危机的影响。

One lasting legacy of the stimulus package is the housing bubble that it created. Data on floor space under construction reveal a massive increase of construction in both commercial and residential real estate. In the four years before implementation of the stimulus package (2005-2008), the total amount of space under construction was 177 million square meters. In the four years following the stimulus package, floor space under construction ballooned to 313 million square meters. Floor space under construction between 2009 and 2012 exceeded the combined total in the prior eight years.123 Although the bubble would grow even bigger during the Xi era, it was a dark cloud hanging over the Chinese economy. When the real estate sector crashed during the Covid-19 pandemic in 2021-2022, a powerful engine of growth became the heaviest drag on the Chinese economy.

刺激计划留下的一个持久遗产是它所制造的房地产泡沫。在建建筑面积数据显示，商业和住宅房地产的建设量都出现了大幅增长。在刺激计划实施前的四年（2005-2008年），在建建筑总面积为1.77亿平方米。而在刺激计划实施后的四年里，在建建筑面积飙升至3.13亿平方米。2009年至2012年间的在建建筑面积甚至超过了此前八年的总和。尽管泡沫在习近平时代进一步扩大，但它始终是笼罩在中国经济上的一片阴云。2021-2022年新冠疫情期间，房地产行业崩盘，曾经强劲的增长引擎反而成了拖累中国经济的最大绊脚石。





Summary





概括


This account of the unprecedented economic growth that China achieved in the two decades following Deng Xiaoping's tour of southern China in 1992 illustrates the diverse factors that made this "miracle" possible and the obstacles to its sustainability. The reforms implemented by the party played a positive role. Even though these measures, rolled out mostly in the 1990s, were partial and oriented toward strengthening state control over the financial sector and the fiscal system, they helped make the economy more open, market-oriented, and productive.124

本文描述了邓小平1992年访问中国南方后，中国在二十年间取得的空前经济增长，并阐述了促成这一“奇迹”的诸多因素以及其可持续性面临的挑战。党推行的改革发挥了积极作用。尽管这些措施主要在20世纪90年代推出，且具有局限性，侧重于加强国家对金融部门和财政体系的控制，但它们确实有助于使经济更加开放、市场化和高效。

At the same time, however, these partial reforms did not fundamentally change China's economic system. The state—in reality, the party—retained control over the most vital economic sectors. The share of SOEs in the economy remained too large to make China qualify as a market economy. Most of the growth during this period should be credited to the private sector, globalization, and favorable structural factors.

然而，与此同时，这些局部改革并未从根本上改变中国的经济体制。国家——实际上是党——仍然控制着最重要的经济部门。国有企业在经济中的份额仍然过大，使中国无法被认定为市场经济体。这一时期的大部分增长应归功于私营部门、全球化和有利的结构性因素。

The post-Tiananmen economic model began to unravel during Hu Jintao's second term, as indicated by falling productivity growth and worsening economic imbalances. This process coincided with the emergence of cracks in the post-Tiananmen political model. In retrospect, the end of the Chinese miracle was almost inevitable. The beneficial effects of the demographic dividend and globalization had either dissipated or disappeared toward the end of the Hu era. In the meantime, the lack of reforms to address high income inequality, inefficient SOEs, macroeconomic imbalances, and the insufficient provision of social services made the economy less dynamic.125

后天安门时代经济模式在胡锦涛第二任期内开始瓦解，表现为生产率增长放缓和经济失衡加剧。这一过程与后天安门时代政治模式出现裂痕不谋而合。回望过去，中国经济奇迹的终结几乎不可避免。人口红利和全球化的积极影响在胡锦涛时代末期要么消散，要么消失殆尽。与此同时，缺乏改革措施来解决收入不平等加剧、国有企业效率低下、宏观经济失衡以及社会服务供给不足等问题，导致经济活力下降。

In the aftermath of the GFC, the party took the path of least resistance: It opened the spigot of credit to fund infrastructure and to inflate a gigantic housing bubble. Even though the party managed to sustain high growth for the short term, its stimulus package worsened the economic imbalances, channeled resources to the least productive sectors, and saddled the economy with a heavy debt burden that would eviscerate its vitality during the subsequent decade. Fittingly, the end of the Chinese miracle also marked the end of the post-Tiananmen neo-authoritarian order and the beginning of a new, and darker, era of neo-Stalinist rule.

全球金融危机之后，中共选择了阻力最小的道路：它打开信贷闸门，为基础设施建设提供资金，并催生了巨大的房地产泡沫。尽管中共在短期内维持了经济的高速增长，但其刺激计划加剧了经济失衡，将资源导向生产力最低的行业，并使经济背负了沉重的债务负担，这将在接下来的十年中严重削弱经济活力。恰如其分的是，中国经济奇迹的终结也标志着后天安门时代新威权秩序的终结，以及一个更加黑暗的新斯大林主义统治时代的开始。





6 Revival of Totalitarianism Under Xi Jinping





6 习近平领导下的极权主义复兴


BEFORE XI Jinping officially became the general secretary of the CCP in November 2012, few would have thought that he could reverse most of Deng's reforms and bring back a form of totalitarian rule within only a few years after his rise. Given the transformative socioeconomic changes China had experienced in the post-Mao era, such a scenario was simply unthinkable. Yet, like most inconceivable events in history, the revival of totalitarianism under Xi becomes almost self-evident only in hindsight. By the time he assumed power, as discussed at the end of chapter 4, the post-Tiananmen order was beginning to unravel. But the political reality of the early 2010s precluded a potential path to democracy through elite-initiated reform. Although fraying elite unity, pervasive corruption, and dissipation of economic dynamism indicated that the party was in trouble, the regime was not in a serious enough legitimacy crisis to precipitate a split between soft-liners and hard-liners, a prerequisite for an elite-led transition.1 Even more important, the absence of liberal reformers in senior leadership positions made this prospect unrealistic.

在习近平于2012年11月正式就任中共中央总书记之前，几乎没有人会想到，他会在上台短短几年内就推翻邓小平的大部分改革，并恢复某种形式的极权统治。考虑到毛泽东时代之后中国经历的翻天覆地的社会经济变革，这种情况简直是不可想象的。然而，如同历史上大多数不可思议的事件一样，习近平领导下的极权主义复兴，只有在事后看来才显得几乎是理所当然的。正如第四章末尾所述，在他掌权之时，天安门事件后的秩序已经开始瓦解。但2010年代初期的政治现实，使得通过精英主导的改革走向民主的道路变得不可能。尽管精英阶层的团结日渐瓦解、腐败盛行以及经济活力的消退表明该党陷入困境，但该政权的合法性危机尚未严重到足以引发温和派和强硬派之间的分裂，而这正是精英主导的转型所必需的。更重要的是，高层领导职位上缺乏自由派改革者，使得这种前景不切实际。

Politically, the path of least resistance for Xi would have been muddling through, as Hu had done throughout his decade in power. This would have required the party to continue its post-Tiananmen survival strategy, but with greater tactical dexterity. The party was not facing an imminent existential threat, so it did not need to adopt dramatic reforms. It seemed to make sense to keep a strategy that had enabled it to enjoy two decades of unprecedented peace, prosperity, and stability. Hu articulated the rationale of playing it safe more succinctly than anyone else. In his last political report to the party on the opening day of the Eighteenth Party Congress in November 2012, he bluntly stated that as long as the party does not zheteng (a colloquial expression best translated as "engage in useless and self-destructive actions"), it would reach its goal of making China a "prosperous, strong, democratic, civilized, and harmonious modern socialist nation."2 At the time, Hu's use of zheteng on such a formal party occasion raised eyebrows. Although Hu's invocation of this phrase was treated as a lame excuse for doing little during his tenure, his political wisdom became clear soon after Xi began to do precisely the opposite, plunging the party into its most turbulent era since the end of the Maoist period.

从政治角度来看，对习近平而言阻力最小的路径或许是像胡锦涛执政十年那样，采取得过且过的方式。这意味着中共需要延续天安门事件后的生存策略，但要更加灵活多变。由于中共并未面临迫在眉睫的生存威胁，因此无需进行剧烈的改革。继续沿用过去二十年来使其享有前所未有的和平、繁荣与稳定的策略，似乎合情合理。胡锦涛对这种稳妥策略的阐述比任何人都更加精辟。在2012年11月中共十八大开幕当天，胡锦涛向全党作最后一次政治报告时，直言不讳地指出，只要党不“作死”（“作死”一词可译为“无用且自毁的行为”），就能实现建设“富强民主文明和谐的社会主义现代化国家”的目标。当时，胡锦涛在如此正式的党内场合使用“作死”一词引起了人们的质疑。尽管胡锦涛援引这个词被认为是其任期内政绩平庸的借口，但随着习近平开始采取截然相反的做法，将党推入毛泽东时代结束以来最动荡的时期，胡锦涛的政治智慧很快就显露出来。

If insecurity motivated risk-averse leaders like Hu to prefer muddling through, the same sense of insecurity could also drive someone like Xi to opt for a radically different course—confronting perceived threats by reviving totalitarianism and reasserting party control over Chinese society. Even though few had thought Xi would embark on such a path, it was this new survival strategy that he started to implement immediately after taking office. The only part of his strategy incongruent with the regime's sense of insecurity was an expansionist foreign policy. Although one might expect an insecure regime to avoid provoking powerful external foes, Xi did the opposite. Most likely he sensed strategic opportunities created by the global financial crisis and America's relative decline in the 2000s. The rapid rise in Chinese power likely made Xi confident that the West would not push back, even if China jettisoned Deng's dictum to "keep a low profile."

如果说不安全感促使像胡锦涛这样规避风险的领导人选择得过且过，那么同样的不安全感也可能驱使像习近平这样的人选择截然不同的道路——通过复兴极权主义、重新确立党对中国社会的控制来应对其所感知到的威胁。尽管很少有人预料到习近平会走上这条道路，但他上任后立即开始实施的正是这一新的生存策略。他的策略中唯一与政权的不安全感相悖的部分是其扩张性的外交政策。人们或许会认为，一个缺乏安全感的政权会避免激怒强大的外部敌人，但习近平的做法恰恰相反。他很可能看到了全球金融危机和美国在2000年代相对衰落所带来的战略机遇。中国实力的迅速崛起可能让习近平相信，即使中国抛弃了邓小平“保持低调”的教诲，西方也不会予以反击。

Xi's personal ambitions and commitment to the preservation of CCP rule most likely had motivated him. Motives alone, however, could not explain the ease with which he dismantled the post-Tiananmen order and reestablished a form of neo-Stalinist rule. He needed enablers—not just shrewd and ruthless henchmen, but also institutional tools—to bring back totalitarian rule. It turned out that such tools were readily available, as more than three decades of economic reform had left the fundamental institutions of totalitarianism largely untouched. To reimpose strict control on Chinese society, Xi could mobilize the regime's potent repressive apparatus, modernized and strengthened by huge investments and advanced technology in the post-Tiananmen era. To reestablish strongman rule, he could weaponize anticorruption investigations to purge political rivals, most of them made vulnerable by their involvement in shady deals. With no civil society, rule of law, or genuine "inner-party" democracy, Xi faced no institutional constraints in exercising his newly acquired power. Only with the revival of totalitarian rule under Xi can we appreciate the tragic consequences of Deng Xiaoping's steadfast resistance to political reform in the 1980s when a narrow path toward a more open and free China existed.

习近平的个人野心和维护中共统治的决心很可能是他采取行动的动机。然而，仅凭动机无法解释他为何如此轻易地瓦解了天安门事件后的秩序，并重建了一种新斯大林主义式的统治。他需要的是帮手——不仅是精明强干、冷酷无情的爪牙，还有制度工具——来恢复极权统治。事实证明，这些工具唾手可得，因为三十多年的经济改革几乎没有触及极权主义的基本制度。为了重新对中国社会实施严格控制，习近平可以调动政权强大的镇压机器，这台机器在天安门事件后的巨额投资和先进技术的帮助下得到了现代化和加强。为了重建强人统治，他可以利用反腐调查来清除政治对手，而这些对手大多因为卷入不法交易而变得脆弱。由于没有公民社会、法治或真正的“党内”民主，习近平在行使他新获得的权力时没有任何制度上的约束。只有随着习近平领导下的极权统治复辟，我们才能体会到邓小平在上世纪80年代坚决抵制政治改革的悲剧后果，当时通往更加开放自由的中国的道路还很狭窄。





The Xi Jinping Manifesto





习近平宣言


Before he rose to the pinnacle of power in November 2012, Xi was a consummate practitioner of "hiding your strength and biding your time," except that he applied this Dengist foreign policy strategy to politics within the CCP. Xi had carefully maintained a low profile and kept his ideas to himself. But once he attained supreme power, he wasted no time in articulating his vision. On a tour of Guangdong in December 2012, about one month after his appointment as party general secretary, he gave a speech to local officials on the greatest threats facing the party. Although the speech was never made public, its leaked content reveals a man whose political agenda had been decidedly shaped by the lessons he had drawn from the fall of the Soviet Union.

在2012年11月登上权力巅峰之前，习近平是一位“藏实力、伺机而动”的典范，只不过他将邓小平的这一外交策略运用到了中共内部政治。习近平一直小心翼翼地保持低调，很少公开表达自己的想法。但一旦掌握了最高权力，他便立即着手阐述自己的愿景。2012年12月，在他被任命为中共中央总书记约一个月后，习近平在广东视察期间，向地方官员发表了关于党面临的最大威胁的讲话。尽管这次讲话从未公开，但泄露的内容显示，习近平的政治纲领显然受到了苏联解体经验的影响。

Notably, Xi made no reference to the abysmal economic performance of the Soviet regime, its imperial overreach, or the Cold War with the United States. Instead, he attributed the collapse of the Soviet Union to the loss of "ideals and convictions" among its elites. He lamented that, when the Soviet Union was dissolved, "in the end nobody was a real man, nobody came out to resist," apparently forgetting about the failed coup staged by the hard-liners in August 1991. His choice of words—"real man"—was especially significant because it appeared to imply that Xi thought the Soviet regime was too soft and cowardly. Unlike Deng, who sent in the military to crush the prodemocracy movement in 1989, Soviet leaders were too squeamish to use mass violence against their own people.3

值得注意的是，习近平只字未提苏联政权糟糕的经济表现、其帝国扩张以及与美国的冷战。相反，他将苏联解体归咎于其精英阶层“理想和信念”的丧失。他感叹，苏联解体后，“最终没有真正的男子汉，没有人站出来反抗”，显然忘记了1991年8月强硬派发动的失败政变。他选择的“真正的男子汉”一词尤其耐人寻味，因为它似乎暗示习近平认为苏联政权过于软弱懦弱。与邓小平在1989年动用军队镇压民主运动不同，苏联领导人过于胆怯，不敢对本国人民使用大规模暴力。

These fragments of Xi's informal conversation with local officials in 2012 give us a glimpse of the two main components of his strategy to prevent the party from following the Soviet path: reviving ideological indoctrination within the regime and escalating repression against its opponents. On January 5, 2013, shortly after his trip to Guangdong, Xi delivered what appeared to be a political manifesto to new members of the CCP Central Committee at a special training class at the Central Party School in Beijing. Significantly, the party released only a brief summary of this speech in January 2013.4 It did not publish its full content until April 2019, most probably because the fuller version of Xi's speech not only signaled a fundamental deviation from Dengism but also because it unabashedly advocated views closely associated with ideological "ultra-leftism."5

这些习近平2012年与地方官员非正式谈话的片段，让我们得以窥见他防止党走苏联道路的两大战略组成部分：在政权内部恢复意识形态灌输，以及加大对反对派的镇压力度。2013年1月5日，在访问广东后不久，习近平在北京中央党校的一个特别培训班上，向新当选的中共中央委员发表了一份看似政治宣言的讲话。值得注意的是，中共在2013年1月仅发布了此次讲话的简短摘要。直到2019年4月，中共才公布了讲话全文，这很可能是因为习近平讲话的完整版本不仅标志着与邓小平思想的根本性背离，而且还毫不掩饰地宣扬了与意识形态上的“极左”密切相关的观点。

Xi's political manifesto, like the leaked content of his talk in Guangdong in December 2012, contained few references to the importance of economic development as the party's fundamental guiding principle. Instead, Xi reminded his audience that "socialism with Chinese characteristics" was socialism and not "other isms." This system, according to Xi, would demonstrate its superiority as it became more mature and allowed China to prosper and exercise more influence in the world. Xi also mentioned the Soviet collapse, albeit without impugning the "manhood" of the Soviet regime. Xi castigated "historical nihilism," which later became Xi's favorite phrase whenever he referred to any efforts to establish the historical truth. In his judgment, the Soviet regime had been negligent in controlling the ideological domain and allowing hostile forces to comprehensively "negate" Soviet history and the Soviet leaders, such as Lenin and Stalin, thus "causing confused thinking." He used the Soviet example to warn against "negating" the Maoist period. This section of his speech represented the strongest endorsement of Mao by a top Chinese leader in the post-Tiananmen era. It also signaled Xi's intention to tighten party control over the ideological sphere.

习近平的政治宣言，如同他2012年12月在广东的讲话泄露内容一样，很少提及经济发展作为党的根本指导原则的重要性。相反，习近平提醒听众，“中国特色社会主义”就是社会主义，而不是“其他主义”。习近平认为，随着这一制度的日趋成熟，它将展现其优越性，使中国繁荣昌盛，并在世界上发挥更大的影响力。习近平还提到了苏联解体，但并未质疑苏联政权的“男子气概”。习近平谴责了“历史虚无主义”，这后来成为他每次提及任何试图确立历史真相的努力时最常用的词汇。在他看来，苏联政权疏于控制意识形态领域，任由敌对势力全面“否定”苏联历史和列宁、斯大林等苏联领导人，从而“造成思想混乱”。他以苏联为例，警告人们不要“否定”毛泽东时代。他讲话的这一部分代表了后天安门时代中国最高领导人对毛泽东最强烈的支持。这也表明了习近平意图加强党对意识形态领域的控制。

Xi concluded his speech by underscoring the imperative to reinvigorate the regime's ideological commitment to communism as its ultimate goal. The loss of this goal, Xi warned, would lead the party astray ideologically, causing it to degenerate into "utilitarianism and pragmatism." He singled out the new ideological doubts, materialism, self-centeredness, passivity, and loss of faith in communism among party members as completely incompatible with the ideological values and historical mission of communism.

习近平在讲话结尾强调，必须重振政权对共产主义的意识形态承诺，将其作为最终目标。他警告说，失去这一目标将使党在意识形态上误入歧途，最终蜕变为“功利主义和实用主义”。他特别指出，党员中出现的新的意识形态怀疑、物质主义、自我中心主义、消极被动以及对共产主义失去信心等现象，与共产主义的意识形态价值观和历史使命完全背道而驰。

Unlike his predecessors, such as Jiang Zemin and Hu Jintao, who routinely recited Communist ideological clichés but seldom allowed them to dictate policy, Xi turned out to be a true believer who meant what he said. When the full text of this political manifesto was released in the party's flagship ideological publication, Qiushi, in April 2019, Xi had been in power for six and half years and had already succeeded in turning the abstract ideas expressed in the manifesto into actual policy. In retrospect, Xi's speech in January 2013 marked the return of orthodox ideology as the party's guiding principle and the end of an era during which the party's top leadership treated economic performance as vital to regime survival.6

与江泽民和胡锦涛等前任领导人不同，他们虽然经常背诵共产主义意识形态的陈词滥调，却很少让这些陈词滥调指导政策，而习近平则是一位言行一致的真正信徒。2019年4月，当这份政治宣言全文在党的旗舰意识形态刊物《求是》上发表时，习近平已经执政六年半，并成功地将宣言中表达的抽象理念转化为实际政策。回顾来看，习近平2013年1月的讲话标志着正统意识形态回归党的指导原则，也标志着党的最高领导层将经济表现视为政权存亡关键的时代的终结。

The specific components of the political order Xi envisioned in early 2013 and later constructed differed qualitatively from the post-Tiananmen neo-authoritarian order. Under Jiang and Hu, the party relied on a diverse set of tools to maintain elite unity and popular support at home and stable ties with the West abroad. In contrast, the new political order under Xi's rule rests on different pillars: centralized one-man rule built on personality cult, rule of fear through constant purges and repression, prioritization of regime security over economic performance, revival of orthodox ideology and political rituals, and an expansionist foreign policy reinforced by a triumphant nationalist narrative—"the China dream."7 As this new order relies on the regime's coercive apparatus more than mass movements, it resembles classic Stalinist bureaucratic totalitarian rule, not Maoist antibureaucratic totalitarian rule.8

习近平在2013年初构想并随后构建的政治秩序的具体组成部分，与天安门事件后的新威权秩序有着本质区别。在江泽民和胡锦涛的领导下，中共依靠多种手段来维护国内精英的团结和民众的支持，以及与西方国家保持稳定的外交关系。相比之下，习近平统治下的新政治秩序建立在不同的支柱之上：以个人崇拜为基础的中央集权式一人统治；通过持续不断的清洗和镇压来制造恐惧；将政权安全置于经济发展之上；复兴正统意识形态和政治仪式；以及以“中国梦”这一胜利的民族主义叙事为支撑的扩张主义外交政策。由于这一新秩序更多地依赖于政权的强制机器而非群众运动，因此它更类似于经典的斯大林式官僚极权统治，而非毛泽东式的反官僚极权统治。

Xi's neo-Stalinist agenda was ambitious, risky, and, around the time of his ascent to the top, apparently unpromising. As a compromise choice to succeed Hu, Xi was selected most likely because he was seen as a weak leader without an extensive network of powerful allies. Taking on the entrenched factions headed by Jiang and Hu could be dangerous because they had planted their supporters in key party positions during their two decades in power. Adopting more repressive tactics and reverting to statist economic policies would likely encounter resistance from below. Indeed, before Xi's formal appointment as party chief in late 2012, there was debate whether Xi was a closet reformer with a more liberal agenda than his predecessors.9 Only after his (manhood) talk about the fall of the Soviet Union was leaked in February 2013 did some begin to develop a sense of foreboding. Fears that Xi was taking the party in a more hard-line and anti-Western direction were reinforced when the leaked content of a key document issued by the General Office of the Central Committee in April—known as Document No. 9—received widespread attention (more on this later).10 By the summer of 2013, when Xi launched a massive crackdown on social media, it was clear that his neo-Stalinist project was well under way.11

习近平的新斯大林主义议程雄心勃勃，风险巨大，而且在他登上权力巅峰之初，前景似乎并不乐观。作为胡锦涛的接班人，习近平之所以被选中，很可能是因为他被视为一位软弱的领导人，缺乏广泛的强大盟友网络。与江泽民和胡锦涛领导的根深蒂固的派系对抗可能十分危险，因为在他们执政的二十年间，他们已将自己的支持者安插在党内要职。采取更严厉的镇压手段并恢复国家主导的经济政策，很可能会遭到来自基层的抵制。事实上，在习近平于2012年底正式就任中共中央总书记之前，人们一直在争论他是否是一位隐藏的改革者，其议程比他的前任们更加自由化。直到2013年2月，他关于苏联解体的（男性）言论被泄露后，一些人才开始感到不祥之兆。 2013年4月，一份由中央办公厅发布的关键文件——即所谓的“九号文件”——的泄露内容引发广泛关注（稍后详述），这加剧了人们对习近平将党带向更强硬和反西方方向的担忧。到2013年夏天，习近平对社交媒体发起大规模打压，显然他的新斯大林主义计划已经全面展开。





War on Corruption





反腐败战争


Prior to Xi's rise, the party had frequently launched anticorruption campaigns to discipline its officials. These campaigns were relatively short in duration, targeting mostly mid- to lower-level functionaries to reestablish party authority and to appease public anger. Although these campaigns seemed to curb corruption for a brief period of time as officials tended to lay low to avoid being caught, their long-term impact was modest at best.12 Politically, the top leaders were careful not to weaponize corruption investigations against their rivals. The two exceptions—the fall of Politburo members Chen Xitong (in 1995) and Chen Liangyu (in 2006) on corruption charges—proved the rule.

在习近平上台之前，中共曾多次发起反腐运动以惩戒官员。这些运动持续时间相对较短，主要针对中低层官员，旨在重塑党的权威并平息公众的愤怒。尽管这些运动似乎在短期内遏制了腐败，因为官员们往往会低调行事以避免被抓，但其长期影响充其量也只能说是微乎其微。在政治上，最高领导人谨慎地避免将反腐调查武器化，以打击政敌。仅有的两个例外——政治局委员陈希同（1995年）和陈良宇（2006年）因腐败指控而下台——恰恰证明了这一原则。

The apparent infrequent weaponization of corruption in elite rivalry was most likely the result of the fragile balance of elite power in the post-Mao era, which prevented the top leader—Deng, Jiang, or Hu—from resorting to this tool, except on rare occasions (Deng did not touch it at all). According to the CCP charter, only the Politburo has the power to expel a member of the Central Committee for violation of party discipline.13 This meant that a top leader had to win support from rival factions to topple any senior official on corruption charges. The presence of rival factions on the Politburo raised this procedural hurdle as all members shared a similar interest in preventing one faction from dominance through the subterfuge of anticorruption investigations.

精英阶层权力斗争中腐败手段的运用似乎并不频繁，这很可能是后毛泽东时代精英权力平衡脆弱的结果。这种脆弱的平衡使得最高领导人——邓小平、江泽民或胡锦涛——除了极少数情况外，很少会动用这一手段（邓小平更是从未使用过）。根据中共党章，只有政治局才有权因违反党纪而开除中央委员。这意味着，最高领导人必须赢得其他派系的支持，才能以腐败指控罢免任何高级官员。政治局内部存在不同派系，这增加了程序上的难度，因为所有委员都希望通过反腐调查来阻止某个派系独揽大权。

In practice, the party's procedural stipulations grant enormous investigative authority to the head of the Central Discipline Inspection Commission (CDIC), the sole body empowered to investigate senior officials.14 Instructively, to prevent the party chief from using anticorruption investigations to purge his rivals, top leaders in the post-Mao era usually picked for this position someone who was not a close ally of the top leader. Chen Yun, the first chief of the CDIC, was actually Deng's rival. During the Jiang period, the head of the CDIC was someone from a rival faction. In Hu's first term, the CDIC was led by an apparatchik perceived to be close to Jiang. In his second term, another official who had quickly risen under Jiang was in charge of the CDIC. Even though the Politburo or the PSC must approve the opening of a formal investigation into a senior official, the head of the CDIC could play a critical role in this process. As the CDIC would conduct "preliminary verification" of alleged violations, it was in a position to gather sufficient evidence to make it difficult for the Politburo to block an investigation.

实际上，党的程序规定赋予中央纪委主任极大的调查权，而中央纪委是唯一有权调查高级官员的机构。值得注意的是，为了防止党的总书记利用反腐调查清除异己，后毛泽东时代的领导人通常会选择与最高领导人关系不密切的人担任这一职务。首任中央纪委主任陈云实际上是邓小平的竞争对手。江泽民时期，中央纪委主任则来自敌对派系。胡锦涛第一任期内，中央纪委主任是一位被认为与江泽民关系密切的官员。胡锦涛第二任期内，另一位在江泽民手下迅速晋升的官员掌管了中央纪委。尽管对高级官员展开正式调查必须得到政治局或国家政协的批准，但中央纪委主任在这一过程中可以发挥关键作用。由于 CDIC 将对涉嫌违规行为进行“初步核实”，因此它能够收集到足够的证据，使政治局难以阻止调查。

The practice of appointing someone who was not an ally of the party chief to be the head of the CDIC ended in November 2012 when Xi's close associate, Wang Qishan, was chosen to take it over. Xi likely had insisted on giving Wang the anticorruption portfolio so that he would have a trusted ally to supervise his war on corruption. With his direct control of the CDIC's investigative capabilities, Wang could be counted on to produce dossiers containing incriminating evidence against rivals that was too strong for the Politburo members to reject.

任命非党魁盟友担任中央反腐败局局长的惯例在2012年11月终结，当时习近平的亲信王岐山被任命为局长。习近平很可能坚持让王岐山担任反腐败职务，以便拥有一个值得信赖的盟友来监督他的反腐斗争。凭借王岐山对中央反腐败局调查能力的直接掌控，他能够提供足以令政治局委员无法驳回的、包含对手确凿证据的档案。

In terms of objectives, targets, ferocity, and duration, Xi's anticorruption campaign differed qualitatively from all previous such efforts. What defines Xi's war on corruption is its objective of systematically dismantling the networks of power formed under Jiang and Hu, neutralizing rivals, and establishing his dominance.15 Also notable is the fact that Xi's campaign focused on high-level officials and their allies in local governments, whereas previous campaigns had ensnared mostly mid-level or junior officials. Tactically, Xi opted for much harsher penalties. Disgraced top leaders, including a former PSC member (Zhou Yongkang), four former Politburo members (Bo Xilai, Guo Boxiong, Xu Caihou, and Sun Zhengcai), and Hu Jintao's former chief of staff (Ling Jihua) were given life sentences. In terms of duration, previous anticorruption drives were short-lived, but Xi's campaign was open-ended. In 2022, for example, a decade after the beginning of his campaign, the party claimed to have investigated (in reality, detained) 32 "centrally supervised" (zhongguan) high-ranking officials, the most since 2018, and 410 mid-level officials.16 Because 2022 was the year of the scheduled Twentieth Party Congress at which Xi planned to secure an unprecedented third term, it seemed likely that he dialed up the anticorruption campaign to deter potential opposition. Xi escalated the purge further in 2023 and 2024, likely to shore up his authority during a period when the Chinese economy was struggling with deflation and an epic real estate crash. In 2023, 47 "centrally supervised" officials were investigated; in 2024, 60 such officials, including two retired provincial party chiefs, were investigated.17 Anticorruption investigations thus became Xi's potent weapon to intimidate and purge rivals and potential threats.

从目标、力度、持续时间来看，习近平的反腐运动与以往所有反腐行动都截然不同。习近平反腐战争的本质在于系统性地瓦解江泽民和胡锦涛时期建立的权力网络，清除异己，巩固自身统治地位。值得注意的是，习近平的反腐运动重点打击地方政府的高级官员及其盟友，而以往的反腐运动主要针对中层或基层官员。在策略上，习近平采取了更为严厉的惩罚措施。包括前国家政协委员周永康、前政治局委员薄熙来、郭伯雄、徐才厚和孙正才以及胡锦涛的前幕僚长凌继华在内的多位落马的高层领导人被判处无期徒刑。就持续时间而言，以往的反腐运动往往昙花一现，而习近平的反腐运动则没有明确的结束日期。例如，在习近平发起反腐运动十年后的2022年，中共声称调查（实际上是拘留）了32名“中央监管”高级官员，这是自2018年以来人数最多的一次，此外还有410名中层官员被调查。由于2022年是中共二十大召开之年，习近平计划在会上确保史无前例的第三个任期，因此他加大反腐力度以震慑潜在的反对派似乎很有可能。习近平在2023年和2024年进一步升级了清洗行动，这很可能是为了在中国经济遭受通货紧缩和房地产市场崩盘的双重打击之际巩固自己的权威。2023年，共有47名“中央监管”官员受到调查； 2024年，包括两名退休省委书记在内的60名此类官员接受了调查。反腐调查由此成为习近平恐吓和清除对手及潜在威胁的有力武器。

A review of the course of Xi's anticorruption drive shows that, from the outset, he had clear political priorities. The first was to neutralize any threat to his power posed by those with ties to the domestic security apparatus and the military. Consequently, the first prominent target of Xi's purge was Zhou Yongkang, a former PSC member and a powerful domestic security chief with close ties to Jiang. An investigation into Zhou began almost as soon as Xi rose to the top. To build a case against Zhou, the CDIC detained several senior officials who had worked with him and could provide incriminating materials. The CDIC also cast a wider net, investigating family members and relatives of the main targets because they could be forced to cooperate. In the case against Zhou Yongkang, it took roughly one year for the CDIC to complete its investigations. The PSC formally placed him under investigation in July 2014; eleven months later, he was convicted of accepting bribes totaling 130 million yuan and leaking state secrets to his personal fortune teller, for which he received a life sentence.18

回顾习近平的反腐历程，可以看出，从一开始，他的政治优先事项就十分明确。首要目标是消除任何与国内安全机构和军队有联系的人对其权力构成的威胁。因此，习近平清洗行动的首要目标是周永康，他曾是国家安全委员会委员，也是与江泽民关系密切的国内安全部门高官。习近平上台后不久，对周永康的调查便立即展开。为了搜集证据，国家安全监察局拘留了几名曾与周永康共事、可能提供不利证据的高级官员。国家安全监察局还扩大了调查范围，对主要目标人物的家人和亲属进行调查，因为他们可能被迫配合。在对周永康的调查中，国家安全监察局耗时约一年才完成。国家安全监察局于2014年7月正式对周永康展开调查。 11个月后，他因收受贿赂1.3亿元人民币和向私人算命先生泄露国家机密而被判处无期徒刑。

The fall of Zhou, the first former PSC member to be jailed in the post-Mao era, sent shockwaves throughout the party-state as it showed that no one was safe under Xi's rule. But that was just the beginning. In March 2014, shortly after the PSC approved an investigation into Zhou's activities, Xu Caihou, a former Politburo member and vice chairman of the CMC, was placed under investigation as well. Several months later, Xu was expelled from the party and transferred to a military court for prosecution. He died in March 2015, before his trial. Xu's colleague and fellow Jiang ally, former Politburo member and CMC vice chairman Guo Boxiong, was investigated for corruption in April 2015 and received a life sentence in July of the following year.

周恩来是毛泽东时代后首位被监禁的前公安委员，他的落马震惊了整个党国体制，表明在习近平的统治下，没有人是安全的。但这仅仅是开始。2014年3月，在公安委员会批准对周恩来的活动进行调查后不久，前政治局委员、中央军委副主席徐才厚也被列入调查名单。几个月后，徐才厚被开除党籍，并被移送军事法庭审判。他在2015年3月去世，当时他尚未受审。徐才厚的同事、江泽民的盟友、前政治局委员、中央军委副主席郭伯雄于2015年4月因腐败问题接受调查，并于次年7月被判处无期徒刑。

The purge of Xu and Guo served another one of Xi's critical objectives—to seize control of the military. Aware that his own survival would be imperiled without the support of the PLA, Xi launched the most far-ranging purge of the senior ranks of the military since the 1971 fall of Lin Biao, a legendary general and Mao's main ally during the Cultural Revolution. By November 2015, Xi's campaign had ensnared forty-five generals for alleged corruption.19 The purge of generals suspected of being disloyal became a constant feature of Xi's rule. In subsequent years, more high-ranking generals, including a former chief of the General Staff and head of the PLA's Political Department, fell victim to Xi's anticorruption investigations. According to a tally by the highly respected journal Caixin, seventy-five generals were arrested between November 2012 and October 2019.20 The removal of generals who had been promoted when Guo and Xu were effectively in charge of military personnel matters (2002-2012) accomplished two goals for Xi: With one stroke, he neutralized the potential threat posed by their supporters in the military and paved the way to appoint his own supporters to those positions.

徐和郭的清洗服务于习近平的另一个关键目标——掌控军队。习近平深知，若失去解放军的支持，他的统治将岌岌可危，因此发动了自1971年林彪倒台以来规模最大的军队高层清洗。林彪是毛泽东在文化大革命期间的主要盟友，也是一位传奇将领。到2015年11月，习近平的这场运动已将45名将军卷入腐败指控。清洗被怀疑不忠的将军成为习近平统治时期的一项常态。在随后的几年里，包括一名前总参谋长和解放军政治部部长在内的更多高级将领成为习近平反腐调查的受害者。据权威媒体财新统计，2012年11月至2019年10月期间，共有75名将军被捕。20 清除那些在郭文贵和徐正昌实际掌管军人事务期间（2002-2012年）晋升的将军，对习近平而言实现了两个目标：一举消除了他们在军队中的支持者构成的潜在威胁，并为任命自己的支持者担任这些职位铺平了道路。

Xi deployed the same tactic to purge senior officials and their supporters in local governments. As shown by the number of officials ranked at bureau level or above who were criminally prosecuted during Xi's first term, his campaign evidently was focusing on senior and mid-level officials in order to destroy entire networks.21 Because the party did not disclose the ranks of those officials who had been criminally prosecuted during the Hu era, we have to use data from the Jiang era as a comparison. According to the CDIC, between October 1992 and June 1997, 1,673 bureau-level and 78 ministerial- or provincial-level officials were prosecuted for corruption. Between October 1997 and September 2002, Jiang's last term in office, 2,422 bureau-level and 98 ministerial- or provincial-level officials were prosecuted for corruption. During Xi's first term, by comparison, 8,900 bureau-level and 440 ministerial- or provincial-level officials were prosecuted for corruption, representing a huge increase in each category.22

习近平运用同样的策略清洗地方政府的高级官员及其支持者。从习近平第一任期内被刑事起诉的局级及以上官员人数可以看出，他的运动显然聚焦于中高级官员，旨在摧毁整个腐败网络。由于党没有公布胡锦涛时期被刑事起诉官员的级别，我们只能使用江泽民时期的数据进行比较。根据中国国家反腐败委员会的数据，1992年10月至1997年6月，共有1673名局级官员和78名部级或省级官员因腐败被起诉。1997年10月至2002年9月，即江泽民的最后一个任期内，共有2422名局级官员和98名部级或省级官员因腐败被起诉。相比之下，习近平第一任期内，因腐败被起诉的局级官员有8900人，部级或省级官员有440人，两类官员被起诉的人数均大幅增加。

A close examination of the highest-ranking targets of Xi's anticorruption campaign reveals that he prioritized the purge of full and alternate members of the Central Committee who typically occupied the most important provincial and ministerial positions. Again, the contrast with his predecessors is illuminating. Between 1992 and 2012, only seventeen full and alternate members of the Central Committee were prosecuted for corruption. During Xi's first decade in power, forty-nine full and alternate members of the Central Committee were punished for corruption (and most sentenced to long prison terms).23

仔细审视习近平反腐运动中最高级别的打击目标，可以发现他优先清洗的是中央委员和候补委员，这些人通常担任着最重要的省级和部级职务。与他的前任相比，这一对比同样发人深省。1992年至2012年间，仅有17名中央委员和候补委员因腐败受到起诉。而在习近平执政的第一个十年里，有49名中央委员和候补委员因腐败受到惩罚（其中大多数人被判处长期监禁）。

In his second term, Xi's top priority was to purge the domestic security apparatus of officials who were suspected of political disloyalty. As a complementary effort, the purge of the so-called political-legal sector would completely cement Xi's control of the coercive apparatus. In January 2018, two months after Xi got a second term, he launched a campaign ostensibly to root out organized crime and its "protective umbrellas"—officials in the domestic security apparatus suspected of shielding criminals from the law.24 The campaign quickly claimed several high-ranking officials, including secretaries of CCP provincial political-legal committees (who typically had served as provincial police chiefs) and an incumbent vice minister of public security, Sun Lijun, who was allegedly the ringleader of a cabal of corrupt officials in the security apparatus.25

习近平第二个任期内的首要任务是清洗国内安全机构中涉嫌政治不忠的官员。作为一项配套措施，对所谓政法部门的清洗将彻底巩固习近平对强制机构的控制。2018年1月，习近平连任两个月后，他发起了一场表面上旨在铲除有组织犯罪及其“保护伞”——即国内安全机构中涉嫌包庇犯罪分子的官员——的运动。这场运动迅速导致多名高级官员落马，其中包括中共省级政法委书记（他们通常曾担任省级公安局局长）以及时任公安部副部长孙立军，据称他是安全机构中一个腐败官员集团的头目。

In February 2021 Xi launched a separate campaign, "Education and Rectification of the Nation's Political-Legal Ranks," explicitly targeting officials in the domestic security sector. As this purge was overseen by Xi's loyal ally Chen Yixin and launched roughly twenty months before the Twentieth Party Congress, at which Xi was expected to seek a third term, its political objectives—removing security officials suspected of disloyalty and intimidating potential threats—were self-evident. A large number of officials fell victim to this round of purges, and many had held senior positions. Fu Zhenghua, a former Central Committee member and executive vice minister of public security, was given a suspended death sentence in September 2022. Another former vice minister of public security who had overseen anticorruption in the Ministry of State Security (MSS), China's secret police, was detained in March 2022 and given a suspended death sentence in January 2023. By July 2022 this campaign had brought down nearly three dozen senior local law enforcement officials, including nine secretaries and deputy secretaries of the provincial legal-political committees.26 Many lower-ranking law enforcement officials also fell into the dragnet. Within the first six months of the campaign, 12,576 police officers had turned themselves in.27 Following this purge, Xi was able to install his loyalist, Wang Xiaohong, as the new minister of public security. Chen Yixin became minister of the MSS in March 2023, thus giving Xi total control over the security apparatus.

2021年2月，习近平发起了一场名为“国家政法干部教育整顿”的运动，目标直指国内安全部门官员。这场清洗运动由习近平的忠实盟友陈宜鑫负责，且在中共二十大召开前约二十个月启动（习近平预计将在二十大上寻求第三个任期），其政治目的——清除被怀疑不忠的安全官员并恐吓潜在威胁——显而易见。大量官员在这场清洗中落马，其中许多人身居要职。前中央委员、公安部常务副部长傅正华于2022年9月被判处死刑，缓期执行。另一位曾任公安部副部长、负责国家安全部反腐工作的官员于2022年3月被捕，并于2023年1月被判处死刑，缓期执行。截至2022年7月，这场运动已导致近30名地方高级执法官员落马，其中包括9名省级政协书记和副书记。许多低级执法官员也未能幸免。在运动开展的头六个月内，就有12576名警察自首。这场清洗之后，习近平得以安插自己的亲信王晓红担任新的公安部长。陈宜新于2023年3月出任国家安全部部长，从而使习近平对安全机构拥有了绝对的控制权。

Despite the scale of the purges, Xi introduced institutional changes to make anticorruption investigations an even more powerful instrument against potential threats. Three weeks after his installation as party chief, the Politburo issued a set of rules limiting official entertainment, meetings, issuance of documents, use of government vehicles, and media coverage of the activities of party leaders.28 Violators would be punished (although these rules apparently do not apply to Xi, who has received lavish media coverage).

尽管清洗规模巨大，习近平仍推行了一系列制度改革，使反腐调查成为应对潜在威胁的更强有力的工具。在他就任中共中央总书记三周后，政治局颁布了一系列规定，限制官方招待、会议、文件签发、公务车辆使用以及媒体对党领导人活动的报道。违规者将受到惩罚（尽管这些规定显然不适用于习近平，他获得了大量的媒体曝光）。

In addition, Xi revised the party's disciplinary code and the procedures for anticorruption investigations to bolster his personal authority and to make any expression of dissent against the top party leadership a punishable infraction of the law. A comparison of the party's disciplinary code formalized under Hu in December 2003 and its revised version published in October 2015 reveals several crucial changes made to suppress potential opposition to Xi's authority. Most notably, the revision added several punishable political violations, such as "wantonly discussing major policies of the party-state and undermining the party's centralized unity, smearing the images of the party and the state, denigrating the top leadership of the party and the state, or distorting the history of the party or of the military." Unauthorized public statements on major policy issues that should be within the "purview of the party center" could result in severe penalties as well.29

此外，习近平还修订了党的纪律守则和反腐败调查程序，以巩固其个人权威，并将任何反对党最高领导层的异议言论都定为违法行为。对比胡锦涛于2003年12月正式制定的党的纪律守则和2015年10月发布的修订版，可以发现其中几项关键改动旨在压制对习近平权威的潜在反对。最显著的是，修订版增加了几项政治违规行为，例如“肆意讨论党国重大政策，破坏党的集中统一，抹黑党和国家的形象，诋毁党和国家的最高领导层，歪曲党和军队的历史”。未经授权就属于“党中央职权范围”的重大政策问题发表公开声明，也可能受到严厉处罚。

To expand the party's disciplinary reach beyond party members, Xi set up a super agency—the National Supervisory Commission—in March 2018. Even though this commission was to be staffed by the same personnel as the CDIC, the law establishing it gave it power to investigate and punish nonparty members who work in SOEs and in publicly funded entities, such as hospitals, universities, cultural institutions, and nongovernmental organizations. The commission and its local agencies were also empowered to detain the subjects of investigation for up to six months without court approval or judicial review.30

为了将党的纪律管辖范围扩大到党员之外，习近平于2018年3月成立了一个超级机构——国家监察委员会。尽管该委员会的人员组成与中央监察委员会相同，但设立该委员会的法律赋予了它调查和惩处在国有企业和公共资助实体（如医院、大学、文化机构和非政府组织）工作的非党员的权力。该委员会及其地方机构还被授权在未经法院批准或司法审查的情况下，拘留被调查对象长达六个月。

It is tempting to credit Xi's unrelenting crackdown for curbing official corruption. But the continuous stream of disgraced officials accused of corruption years after the beginning of Xi's campaign suggests that his war on corruption had at most a partial impact on curbing corruption. In all likelihood, Xi's other policies—such as suppressing press freedoms and civil society and shifting resources to the state sector—either facilitated or made it difficult to fight corruption.31 This outcome should not be surprising because the principal objective of Xi's crackdown on corruption was for him to gain political dominance. In this regard, the campaign has evidently served him well.

人们很容易将习近平不遗余力的反腐行动归功于遏制官员腐败。然而，在习近平反腐运动开始数年后，仍有源源不断的官员因腐败指控而身败名裂，这表明他的反腐战争至多只起到了部分作用。很可能，习近平的其他政策——例如压制新闻自由和公民社会、将资源转移到国有部门——要么助长了腐败，要么使反腐工作更加困难。这一结果并不令人意外，因为习近平反腐的主要目的是为了巩固其政治统治地位。从这个角度来看，这场运动显然对他大有裨益。





Power Grab





权力争夺


Taking advantage of the momentum of his anticorruption drive, Xi wasted little time to consolidate power. He scored his greatest victory in October 2016 when the Central Committee formally granted him the title of "core leader." (Jiang's designation, conferred on him by Deng, was a less significant achievement.)32 Underscoring Xi's newly obtained political supremacy, the Central Committee communique announcing the elevation of his status called on the party to "firmly and unswervingly preserve and defend the authority of the party center and its centralized and unified leadership," an obvious reference to Xi.33

凭借反腐运动的势头，习近平迅速巩固了权力。2016年10月，中央正式授予他“核心领导人”的称号，这是他取得的最大胜利。（姜孝林的称号由邓小平授予，意义相对较小。）为了凸显习近平新近获得的政治至高地位，中央在宣布提升其地位的公报中呼吁全党“坚定不移地维护和捍卫党的中央权威和集中统一领导”，这显然是指习近平。

Besides gaining this coveted title, Xi had scored other major victories. He successfully grabbed power that normally would belong to the premier. This was accomplished by establishing "leading small groups" that effectively took away power to make policy on specific issues from the State Council. For instance, he formed the "Central Leading Small Group on Comprehensive Deepening Reform" in November 2013 and appointed himself as its chairman. Because of its broad mandate, any new reform or policy change required its approval, thus allowing Xi to control more directly the overall political and economic agendas. Other new leading small groups Xi established and also headed at the beginning of his first term oversaw cybersecurity and military reform. In addition, he chaired preexisting leading small groups on foreign policy, Taiwan affairs, and finance.34

除了获得这一令人垂涎的头衔外，习近平还取得了其他重大胜利。他成功攫取了通常属于总理的权力。这是通过建立“领导小组”实现的，这些小组有效地从国务院手中夺取了在特定问题上制定政策的权力。例如，他在2013年11月成立了“中央全面深化改革领导小组”，并任命自己为组长。由于该小组拥有广泛的职权范围，任何新的改革或政策变化都需要其批准，从而使习近平能够更直接地控制整体政治和经济议程。习近平在其第一任期之初还成立并领导了其他一些新的领导小组，负责网络安全和军事改革。此外，他还担任了此前已有的外交政策、台湾事务和金融等领导小组的组长。

Another tactic he used to amass power was a systematic revision of the party's organizational rules and the updating of its resolutions on history to formalize and legitimize his personal authority and expand his power. Immediately after the conclusion of the Nineteenth Party Congress in October 2017, the Politburo issued the "Regulations on Strengthening and Maintaining the Party Center's Centralized and Unified Leadership." Although the full text of this document has not been made public, the official media have disclosed some of its key points. First, the regulations emphasize absolute loyalty to Xi, as indicated by the statement that the Politburo must "resolutely maintain General Secretary Xi Jinping's status as the core of the party center and the entire party." In addition, the regulations require Politburo members to "proactively report major issues to the party center for deliberation, studiously implement decisions and plans of the party center, and make timely reports on their significant progress ... (and) self-consciously struggle against words and acts that ... harm the party center's centralized leadership and unity." To enforce these rather abstract requirements, the regulations include an unprecedented rule mandating that Politburo members must submit annual written self-evaluations of their job performance to the general secretary (i.e., Xi). This provision, which recalls the Maoist "self-criticisms" the late dictator regularly forced his colleagues to make, grants Xi additional leverage over Politburo members, who must perform this annual exercise in full awareness of the adverse consequences of an unfavorable evaluation of their performance. In addition to the Politburo members, other senior leaders, such as the members of the Secretariat of the Central Committee, the CDIC, the party organizations within the Standing Committee of the NPC, the State Council, the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference, the Supreme People's Court, and the Supreme People's Procuratorate, are required to submit similar self-evaluations to the PSC and the Politburo, thus allowing Xi to more directly control the critical central organs of the regime.35

他巩固权力的另一策略是系统性地修改党的组织规则和历史决议，以正式化和合法化其个人权威并扩大权力。2017年10月中共十九大闭幕后，政治局立即印发了《关于加强和维护党中央集中统一领导的规定》。虽然该文件的全文尚未公开，但官方媒体已披露了其部分要点。首先，该规定强调对习近平的绝对忠诚，其中指出政治局必须“坚决维护习近平总书记作为党中央和全党核心的地位”。此外，该规定要求政治局委员“主动向党中央报告重大问题供其审议，认真执行党中央的决定和计划，及时报告取得的重大进展……（并）自觉反对损害党中央集中领导和团结的言行”。为了落实这些较为抽象的要求，相关规定中包含一项前所未有的条款，强制政治局委员每年向总书记（即习近平）提交书面工作绩效自评报告。这项规定让人想起毛泽东时代强迫其同僚进行“自我批评”的做法，赋予习近平对政治局委员更大的影响力，因为政治局委员必须在充分意识到不利评价后果的情况下完成这项年度自评。除了政治局委员之外，其他高级领导人，例如中央书记处书记、中央情报局书记、全国人大常委会各级党组织、国务院、全国政协、最高人民法院和最高人民检察院的官员，也被要求向政协和政治局提交类似的自评报告，从而使习近平能够更直接地控制政权的关键中央机关。

To bolster the legitimacy of his personal authority, Xi undertook to rewrite a landmark document issued under Deng to prevent the return of a Mao-like figure. In February 1980 the Central Committee had approved a historic document, the "Guiding Principles for Inner-Party Political Life" that explicitly established collective leadership and prohibited personality cults.36 As this document would stand in the way of Xi's goal of replacing collective leadership with one-man rule and fortifying his power with a personality cult, the Central Committee, most likely under pressure from Xi, revised it at the same plenum that granted Xi the title of "core leader" in October 2016. A comparison of the two documents shows that the revision completely removes the prohibition against personality cults and downplays the principle of collective leadership, while, in an obvious reference to Xi, placing strong emphasis on the authority of the "core leadership."37

为了巩固个人权威的合法性，习近平着手修改邓小平时期颁布的一份具有里程碑意义的文件，以防止出现类似毛泽东的人物。1980年2月，中央委员会批准了一份历史性文件——《党内政治生活指导原则》，该原则明确确立了集体领导制，并禁止个人崇拜。由于这份文件会阻碍习近平以一人统治取代集体领导制、并通过个人崇拜巩固自身权力的目标，中央委员会很可能是在习近平的压力下，于2016年10月的同一次全会上对其进行了修订，并在会上授予习近平“核心领导人”的称号。对比两份文件可知，修订后的文件完全删除了禁止个人崇拜的条款，淡化了集体领导制的原则，同时，显然是针对习近平，着重强调了“核心领导人”的权威。

The party's celebration of its centennial in 2021 provided another opportunity for Xi to burnish his credentials as a great leader. The Central Committee issued a historic resolution in November of that year, ostensibly to summarize the party's experiences during the past century. But in a comparison of two similar documents, the one issued by Mao in 1945 and the other by Deng in 1981, Xi's version focuses mostly on the party's self-proclaimed accomplishments during Xi's nine years in power—the so-called "New Era." Roughly 19,000 of the resolution's 36,200 characters are devoted to Xi's period in power, while the sections covering the prior ninety-one years of party history contain only 10,000 characters.38

2021年，中共庆祝建党百年，这为习近平提供了又一次巩固其伟大领袖形象的机会。同年11月，中央委员会发表了一份历史性决议，表面上是为了总结党在过去一个世纪中的经验。但对比毛泽东1945年和邓小平1981年发表的两份类似文件，习近平的版本主要侧重于党自诩的在其执政九年——即所谓的“新时代”——取得的成就。这份36200字的决议中，约有19000字用于描述习近平的执政时期，而涵盖此前91年党史的部分仅有10000字。

Xi's efforts to revive a personality cult go well beyond passing resolutions glorifying his leadership. Coverage of his activities dominates the official media. His published works are on prominent display in bookstores. Judging by the number of published volumes of his collected works, those by Xi exceed those by all other Chinese leaders, including Mao. In February 2022 the first volume of Selected Letters of Xi Jinping was published, implying that future volumes would be forthcoming (among Xi's predecessors, only one volume of Mao's Selected Letters was published). This honor was not accorded to Deng or any other revolutionary leader. By June 2022, four volumes of Xi's speeches on governance had been published, equaling the number of volumes of Mao's Selected Works released during Mao's time in office (Deng, Jiang, and Hu were limited to three volumes each). In 2023 the party released two additional volumes, Selected Readings of Xi Jinping's Works as well as a college textbook, Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics in the New Era.

习近平重塑个人崇拜的努力远不止于通过决议歌颂其领导。官方媒体对其活动的报道占据主导地位。他的著作在书店里占据显眼位置。从其著作集的出版卷数来看，习近平的著作集超过了包括毛泽东在内的所有其他中国领导人。2022年2月，《习近平书选》第一卷出版，这意味着后续卷册也将陆续面世（在习近平的前任领导人中，毛泽东的《毛泽东书选》仅出版了一卷）。邓小平和其他任何革命领袖都没有获得过这样的殊荣。截至2022年6月，习近平的《治国理政》四卷本已出版，与毛泽东在任期间出版的《毛泽东文选》卷数持平（邓小平、江泽民和胡锦涛的《毛泽东文选》均为三卷）。 2023年，党又出版了两卷著作：《习近平著作选读》和一本大学教材：《习近平新时代中国特色社会主义思想》。

Judging by the outcome of the Nineteenth Party Congress in October 2017, Xi's neo-Stalinist tactics evidently paid off. On the eve of the gathering, Xi arrested Sun Zhengcai, a Politburo member affiliated with the Jiang faction who had been seen as a potential candidate for the position of party chief. (Sun was later sentenced to life in prison for alleged corruption.) The prosecution of Sun was evidently carried out to intimidate rival factions that might have been standing in the way of Xi's plans to remake the top party leadership at the upcoming party congress.

从2017年10月召开的中共十九大结果来看，习近平的新斯大林主义策略显然奏效了。在十九大召开前夕，习近平逮捕了政治局委员孙正才，此人是江泽民派的成员，曾被视为党总书记的潜在人选。（孙正才后来因涉嫌腐败被判处无期徒刑。）显然，对孙正才的起诉是为了震慑那些可能阻碍习近平在即将召开的党代会上重塑党内最高领导层的反对派。

As expected, the congress cemented Xi's political dominance: Two-thirds of the twenty-five Politburo members were his acolytes. Of the six other members of the PSC, Xi could count at least four as allies (one of them was in charge of the powerful CDIC). His loyalists were also made party chiefs of the most important provinces, such as Beijing, Shanghai, Guangdong, Chongqing, and Xinjiang.

正如预期的那样，这次大会巩固了习近平的政治统治地位：25名政治局委员中有三分之二是他的亲信。在另外6名政治常委中，至少有4名是习近平的盟友（其中一人掌管着权力强大的中央投资局）。他的亲信还被任命为北京、上海、广东、重庆和新疆等重要省份的党委书记。

Most important, at the same party congress Xi revealed his intention of breaking the implicit two-term limit for the general secretary. At the Seventeenth Party Congress in 2007, when Hu was about to start his second term, the party designated his successor, Xi, after intense internal jockeying. A decade later, however, Xi prevented the designation of an heir-apparent since no newly promoted members of the PSC were under 55 (the ideal age for a potential successor because that person would be 60 when appointed party chief at the next party congress and then could serve two five-year terms).

最重要的是，在同一次党代会上，习近平透露了他打算打破总书记两届任期限制的意图。2007年，在胡锦涛即将开始第二任期的十七大上，经过激烈的内部角逐，党内指定了习近平为他的接班人。然而，十年后，习近平阻止了指定接班人的行动，因为当时没有新晋升的全国政协委员低于55岁（55岁是潜在接班人的理想年龄，因为这个人将在下届党代会上被任命为党的总书记时年满60岁，可以连任两届，每届五年）。

Having stacked the Politburo with supporters, Xi immediately took the required procedural steps to break the implicit term limits. Of his three positions—CCP general secretary, chairman of the CMC, and state president—only one, the state president—was subject to an explicit constitutional limit.

习近平在政治局安插了大量支持者后，立即采取必要程序步骤打破了不成文的任期限制。在他的三个职位——中共中央总书记、中央军委主席和国家主席——中，只有国家主席一职受到宪法的明确限制。

Even though this position is largely ceremonial, the party chief must also hold the title of state president to engage in top-level foreign affairs. Diplomatic protocols usually do not allow foreign heads of state to meet the leader of a political party. Xi thus had to abolish the constitutional term limit for the state president as a first step to extend his rule indefinitely.

尽管这一职位在很大程度上是礼仪性的，但党的总书记也必须兼任国家主席，才能参与最高级别的外交事务。外交礼仪通常不允许外国元首会见政党领袖。因此，习近平不得不废除宪法规定的国家主席任期限制，以此作为无限期延长其统治的第一步。

In January 2018 the Politburo approved a package of constitutional amendments that contained the abolition of the presidential term limit even though the meeting's press release did not refer to this particular amendment. In March the annual NPC meeting, the rubber-stamp parliament, duly approved the abolition of presidential term limits, signaling Xi's intention to serve indefinitely.39

2018年1月，政治局批准了一揽子宪法修正案，其中包括取消国家主席任期限制，尽管会议新闻稿并未提及此项修正案。同年3月，橡皮图章式的全国人大年会正式批准取消国家主席任期限制，表明习近平有意无限期任职。

At the Twentieth Party Congress in October 2022, Xi easily obtained a third term as CCP general secretary, and by the time of the conclusion of the congress, he had achieved total political dominance. Implicit norms on term and age limits no longer applied to him or to his followers. In addition to giving himself a third term, Xi kept on the Politburo two supporters who were over the implicit mandatory retirement age of 68, but he also forced out two rivals, Premier Li Keqiang and PSC member Wang Yang, who were under 68. A former Politburo member, 59-year-old Hu Chunhua, was not reappointed because he was a protégé of Hu Jintao (no relation) and a possible contender for future party chief. At the Twentieth Party Congress, Xi also prevented the designation of a potential successor.

在2022年10月召开的中共二十大上，习近平轻松连任中共中央总书记，并在大会闭幕时实现了绝对的政治掌控。关于任期和年龄限制的隐性规范对他及其追随者不再适用。除了让自己连任第三届外，习近平还保留了两位超过68岁法定退休年龄的支持者在政治局任职，同时排挤了两位未满68岁的竞争对手——国务院总理李克强和国家政协委员汪洋。一位59岁的前政治局委员胡春华没有获得连任，因为他是胡锦涛（与胡锦涛并无亲属关系）的门生，也是未来党总书记的潜在人选。在中共二十大上，习近平还阻止了潜在接班人的指定。





Flash the Sword





闪剑


Shortly after Xi delivered his political manifesto, "Some Questions on Maintaining and Developing Socialism with Chinese Characteristics," at the Central Party School in January 2013, the General Office of the Central Committee, which at that time was directed by Xi's close ally, Li Zhanshu, issued the now-infamous Document No. 9, "Communique on the Current State of the Ideological Sphere." The document identifies "erroneous ideological trends" that must be "watched." The document was issued on April 22, 2013, but it was never made public, most likely because it would reveal Xi's hard-line ideological stance. When it was leaked in August 2013, its contents confirmed Xi's hostility to liberal ideas.

2013年1月，习近平在中央党校发表了题为《关于坚持和发展中国特色社会主义的若干问题》的政治宣言后不久，时任中央办公厅主任、习近平的亲密盟友栗战书发布了臭名昭著的9号文件——《关于当前意识形态领域的状况通报》。该文件指出了一些必须“警惕”的“错误思想潮流”。这份文件于2013年4月22日发布，但从未公开，很可能是因为它会暴露习近平的强硬意识形态立场。2013年8月，该文件被泄露，其内容证实了习近平对自由主义思想的敌视。

According to Document No. 9, the party must tighten control over the media and guard against seven subversive ideas—Western constitutional democracy, universal values, civil society, economic neo-liberalism, the Western concept of press freedom, historical nihilism (exposing the party's dark past), and questioning the nature of socialism with Chinese characteristics. In addition to listing these ideas that could directly undermine party legitimacy, Document No. 9 also sounds an alarm about subversive dissident activities, such as agitation for political reform, human rights, press freedom, and public disclosure of officials' assets. It warns that Western diplomatic missions, media, and NGOs were engaging in various activities inside of China to cultivate opposition forces and to conduct "cyber infiltration." According to the authors of Document No. 9, the West represents an existential threat because it seeks regime change through "Westernizing, splitting, and color revolutions."40 Despite the dire warnings in Document No. 9, the party waited until August 2013 before launching a full-scale crackdown on the dangerous trends identified in the document.

根据第九号文件，党必须加强对媒体的控制，防范七种颠覆性思想——西方宪政民主、普世价值、公民社会、经济新自由主义、西方新闻自由观念、历史虚无主义（揭露党的黑暗历史）以及质疑中国特色社会主义的本质。除了列举这些可能直接损害党的合法性的思想外，第九号文件还对颠覆性异议活动发出警告，例如鼓动政治改革、人权、新闻自由以及公开官员财产等。文件警告称，西方外交机构、媒体和非政府组织正在中国境内开展各种活动，以培养反对派力量并进行“网络渗透”。根据《第九号文件》的作者所述，西方构成生存威胁，因为它试图通过“西化、分裂和颜色革命”来实现政权更迭。尽管《第九号文件》发出了严峻的警告，但党直到2013年8月才对文件中指出的危险趋势展开全面镇压。

Liangjian, or flash your sword, is an apt metaphor for Xi's get-tough-on-dissent approach, and, unsurprisingly, it quickly became a popular phrase in the official media despite its association with intimidation and violence. In all likelihood, Xi first invoked this phrase at the National Meeting on Publicity and Theoretical Work in August 2013, even though the phrase cannot be found in the published version of his speech. Nevertheless, two clues suggest Xi himself likely used this phrase at this conference. First, the published official version of Xi's speech, most probably sanitized, urges the party to "maintain an initiative and fight successful offensive battles" (zhudong zhang) on fundamental political issues.41 Second, the official media published summaries of the reflections by all thirty-one provincial propaganda chiefs (who almost certainly attended the conference) on Xi's speech. Notably, ten used the phrase "dare to flash your sword" (ganyu liangjian). As it is customary for provincial propaganda chiefs to regurgitate key points made by the party chief (in this case, Xi), it is reasonable to conclude that they were merely parroting one of the most emphatic points Xi made at the conference.42

“亮剑”一词恰如其分地比喻了习近平对异议采取的强硬态度，尽管它与恐吓和暴力联系在一起，却迅速成为官方媒体的常用语，这并不令人意外。习近平很可能在2013年8月的全国宣传和理论工作会议上首次使用了这一短语，尽管在其讲话的正式版本中并未出现。然而，有两条线索表明习近平本人很可能在这次会议上使用了这一短语。首先，习近平讲话的正式版本（很可能经过了删改）敦促党在根本政治问题上“保持主动，打赢进攻战”。其次，官方媒体刊登了31位省级宣传部长（他们几乎肯定参加了会议）对习近平讲话的总结。值得注意的是，其中10位部长使用了“敢于亮剑”这一短语。由于地方宣传负责人通常会复述党总书记（在本例中是习近平）的要点，因此可以合理地推断，他们只不过是在鹦鹉学舌地重复习近平在会议上强调的要点之一。

Events that transpired subsequently show what liangjian meant—it was a concerted preemptive campaign against a potential "color revolution," marking a fundamental shift from the party's stance toward dissent in the post-Tiananmen era. Both Jiang and Hu had adopted a defensive or reactive strategy of repression: They usually cracked down on dissent in response to overt challenges to party authority or actions by the country's small community of dissidents who crossed the regime's threshold of tolerance. From the very beginning, however, Xi's campaign assumed a preemptive or offensive nature. Instead of responding to overly aggressive challenges to one-party rule, his campaign targeted the very sources that could generate, maintain, and reproduce such threats: social media, human rights activists, lawyers, liberal academics, ethnic minorities, NGOs and their foreign supporters, and protest movements in Hong Kong. This campaign is also notable for its blitzkrieg tactics: The crackdown was carried out at lightning speed. Targets of the repression received harsh punishments, extra-judicial mass incarcerations, or long prison sentences, which the party had eschewed during the pre-Xi period. In another qualitative departure from his predecessors' tactics in dealing with threats to the party, Xi sought to reinforce his metaphoric "sword" through institutionalization and the party-controlled legal system. As a result, new bureaucracies overseeing cybersecurity and national security were established. New laws and regulations, such as those governing foreign NGOs, cybersecurity, and internet use, were issued to add a veneer of legality to the emerging neo-Stalinist order.

随后发生的事件表明了“两建”的含义——这是一场针对潜在“颜色革命”的有预谋的先发制人运动，标志着中共在后天安门时代对待异议的立场发生了根本性转变。江泽民和胡锦涛都采取了防御性或被动的镇压策略：他们通常只在异议人士公开挑战党的权威，或少数异议人士越过政权容忍底线时才会进行镇压。然而，习近平的这场运动从一开始就呈现出先发制人、主动出击的性质。他没有被动应对对一党专政过于激进的挑战，而是将目标对准了那些可能产生、维持和复制此类威胁的源头：社交媒体、人权活动人士、律师、自由派学者、少数民族、非政府组织及其外国支持者，以及香港的抗议运动。这场运动的另一个显著特点是其闪电战式的策略：镇压行动以闪电般的速度展开。镇压对象遭受了严厉的惩罚、法外大规模监禁或长期监禁，而这些在习近平之前是中共所避免的。与前任应对党内威胁的策略相比，习近平在另一项质的转变中，试图通过制度化和党控的法律体系来强化其象征性的“利剑”。因此，负责网络安全和国家安全的新官僚机构得以建立。新的法律法规，例如关于外国非政府组织、网络安全和互联网使用的法律法规，相继出台，为正在形成的“新斯大林主义”秩序披上了一层合法性的外衣。

The first target of this preemptive campaign was social media, which had gained unprecedented reach and influence due to the popularization of smart phones. Not coincidentally, the crackdown on social media began on August 20, 2013, the same day that the national publicity conference ended. Police in Beijing arrested Qin Zhihui, a well-known blogger with a mass following, on charges of fabricating online rumors. Three of his colleagues were arrested as well. Charles Xue, a Chinese American businessman with over twelve million verified followers on Weibo (a Chinese microblogging website), was detained on August 23 for "patronizing a prostitute." He later appeared on national TV confessing his crime, evidently against his own will. Several hundred netizens were arrested, detained, or punished between August 20 and 31 in this nationwide crackdown, which was carried out to implement Xi's order for a "serious blow" against internet "rumors."43 On September 6 the party-controlled Supreme People's Court and Supreme People's Procuratorate issued a joint "legal interpretation" that made "internet libel" a criminal offense. If a piece of "libelous information" receives more than five thousand clicks or is forwarded more than five hundred times, its author will receive severe punishment.44 The effect of "flashing" this metaphorical "sword" was instant: by singling out well-known social media influencers, the party tamed China's once-vibrant social media practically overnight, a feat few had thought was either conceivable or feasible.45

这场先发制人的行动首要目标是社交媒体，智能手机的普及使其获得了前所未有的影响力和覆盖面。并非巧合的是，对社交媒体的打压始于2013年8月20日，也就是全国宣传大会闭幕的同一天。北京警方以捏造网络谣言的罪名逮捕了拥有大量粉丝的知名博主秦志辉，他的三名同事也一同被捕。8月23日，拥有超过1200万微博认证粉丝的美籍华裔商人薛志辉因“嫖娼”被拘留。之后，他出现在国家电视台，被迫承认了自己的罪行。 8月20日至31日，在全国范围内开展的这场打击网络谣言的行动中，数百名网民被逮捕、拘留或处罚。此次行动旨在落实习近平关于“重击”网络“谣言”的命令。9月6日，最高人民法院和最高人民检察院联合发布法律解释，将“网络诽谤”定为刑事犯罪。如果一条“诽谤信息”的点击量超过5000次或转发量超过500次，其作者将受到严厉处罚。这一举措的效果立竿见影：通过重点打击知名的社交媒体影响者，中共几乎在一夜之间驯服了中国曾经充满活力的社交媒体，这在当时几乎是不可想象的。

To institutionalize the party's strict control over cyberspace, Xi established the "Central Leading Small Group on Cybersecurity and Informatization" in February 2014. He personally chaired this committee and appointed a party propaganda official, Lu Wei, to direct its daily operations. (In March 2018 Xi elevated the "leading group" to the status of a central commission and made himself its chairman.) Lu Wei, a ruthless apparatchik, faithfully implemented Xi's orders and instituted a series of new censorship measures (including a requirement that all social media users register their accounts with their real names so the authorities could identify them).46 The Cyber Security Law passed in November 2016 is another attempt to solidify party control of the internet as it strictly forbids anyone from "using the internet to engage in activities that endanger state security, reputation, and interests, or instigate the subversion of state power, the socialist system . . . fabricate and disseminate false information."47

为了将党对网络空间的严格控制制度化，习近平于2014年2月成立了“中央网络安全和信息化领导小组”。他亲自担任该小组组长，并任命党的宣传官员卢伟负责指导其日常运作。 （2018年3月，习近平将“领导小组”提升为中央委员会，并亲自担任主席。）冷酷无情的官僚陆伟忠实地执行了习近平的命令，并推行了一系列新的审查措施（包括要求所有社交媒体用户使用真实姓名注册账户，以便当局识别用户身份）。2016年11月通过的《网络安全法》是进一步巩固党对互联网控制的又一举措，该法严格禁止任何人“利用互联网从事危害国家安全、声誉和利益的活动，或者煽动颠覆国家政权、社会主义制度的活动……捏造、散布虚假信息”。

Around the same time as the crackdown on social media, the party began a separate campaign against well-known human rights activists and dissidents. During the Jiang and Hu periods, the regime had dealt with most dissidents using less repressive tactics. They were placed under routine surveillance and occasionally harassed, but most remained free. However, under Xi's new policy of "flashing your sword," they were not only arrested but sentenced to long prison terms under trumped-up charges, such as "picking quarrels and provoking trouble" and "disturbing public order"—the two criminal charges the regime favored using against its opponents. In July 2013 Xu Zhiyong, a Beijing-based legal scholar who had gained fame a decade earlier for petitioning the NPC to abolish the harsh antivagrancy regulation, was arrested for "disturbing public order." Xu had founded the New Citizens Movement in 2010 to promote constitutional rule, equal rights, and government transparency. During the Hu period, the authorities largely left him alone, even allowing him to run for—and win two times—a seat in a district people's congress in Beijing. Apparently to make Xu an example, the party sentenced him to four years in prison in 2014. (In 2020 he was rearrested and later received a sentence of fourteen years.)

在打压社交媒体的同时，中共也开始对知名人权活动人士和异见人士发起另一场运动。在江泽民和胡锦涛执政时期，政权对待大多数异见人士的手段相对温和。他们受到例行监视，偶尔也会受到骚扰，但大多数人仍然享有自由。然而，在习近平“亮剑”的新政策下，他们不仅遭到逮捕，还被以捏造的罪名判处长期监禁，例如“寻衅滋事”和“扰乱公共秩序”——这两项罪名正是政权惯用的对付反对派的手段。2013年7月，常驻北京的法学学者徐志勇因“扰乱公共秩序”被捕。十年前，他曾因向全国人大请愿废除严苛的反流浪条例而声名鹊起。徐志勇于2010年创立了“新公民运动”，旨在倡导宪政、平等权利和政府透明。胡锦涛执政时期，当局基本上没有干涉徐勇，甚至允许他两次竞选并当选北京市区人大代表。显然是为了杀鸡儆猴，中共于2014年判处徐勇四年有期徒刑。（2020年他再次被捕，后被判处十四年有期徒刑。）

The party flashed its biggest metaphoric sword on July 9, 2015, when it conducted a nationwide crackdown on human rights lawyers. Police detained more than three hundred lawyers who had been active in the rights defense movement. Many were later debarred and imprisoned. Like the campaign to silence social media in August 2013, the blitzkrieg against human rights lawyers instantly destroyed a nascent but largely informal political movement seeking modest incremental change through the legal system that the party itself had established and controlled. Based on the limited success of these lawyers in seeking judicial relief for their clients during the less repressive Hu era, they did not present a serious threat to one-party rule. But in Xi's "new era," no form or degree of dissent could be tolerated. Indeed, in the eyes of Xi's regime, human rights lawyers exploiting the loopholes and formal procedures of China's legal system were far more dangerous because they were more resourceful, sophisticated, and difficult to deal with than the less well-educated workers and farmers. They could not only expose the regime's hypocrisy and brutality but also set examples for challenging its rule peacefully and, on occasion, successfully.48

2015年7月9日，中共挥舞着其最具象征意义的利剑，在全国范围内对人权律师展开镇压。警方拘留了三百多名积极参与维权运动的律师，其中许多人随后被吊销律师执照并遭到监禁。如同2013年8月的社交媒体封杀行动一样，这场针对人权律师的闪电战瞬间摧毁了一场萌芽但主要以非正式形式存在的政治运动。这场运动旨在通过中共自身建立和控制的法律体系，寻求渐进式的、温和的变革。在胡锦涛执政时期，这些律师为客户寻求司法救济的成效有限，因此并未对一党专政构成严重威胁。但在习近平的“新时代”，任何形式、任何程度的异议都无法容忍。事实上，在习近平政权眼中，那些利用中国法律体系漏洞和形式程序的维权律师远比那些受教育程度较低的工人和农民更加危险，因为他们更加足智多谋、老练世故，也更难对付。他们不仅可以揭露政权的虚伪和残暴，还可以为和平挑战其统治树立榜样，而且有时还能取得成功。

Labor organizers came under attack in April 2014 when a court in Guangzhou convicted eleven labor activists for "disturbing public order." In December 2015 at least three leaders of the workers' rights movement in Guangzhou were arrested for "gathering a crowd to disturb social order."49 Supporters of labor rights were not left alone, either. In the fall of 2018, police conducted a nationwide crackdown on self-proclaimed Marxist students involved in protesting against violations of labor rights.50 Compared with the repressive tactics previously used by the party against labor organizers, which mainly consisted of intimidation and harassment, Xi's campaign against labor rights activists was decidedly an escalation in terms of state-sponsored violence as it used criminal charges, such as "picking quarrels and provoking trouble," to convict and imprison them.51 The crackdown on other civil society organizations similarly followed this new approach of "authoritarian legality."52

2014年4月，广州一家法院以“扰乱公共秩序”的罪名判处11名劳工维权人士有罪，劳工组织者因此遭受攻击。2015年12月，广州至少三名工人权益运动领导人因“聚众扰乱社会秩序”被捕。劳工权益的支持者也未能幸免。 2018年秋季，警方在全国范围内对自称马克思主义者的学生进行镇压，这些学生参与了抗议劳动权利受到侵犯的活动。50 与此前党对劳工组织者主要采取的恐吓和骚扰等镇压手段相比，习近平对劳工权利活动人士的镇压行动在国家暴力方面无疑有所升级，因为它使用了“寻衅滋事”等刑事指控来定罪和监禁他们。51 对其他公民社会组织的镇压也同样遵循了这种新的“威权法治”方式。52

Liberal academics were not spared in the crackdown. Academics whose lectures or online speech contained views contradicting or violating official orthodoxy were either warned or dismissed. Based on a partial record of academics fired under Xi's rule, this campaign started in late 2013 when a law professor at the prestigious East China University of Political Science and Law in Shanghai was fired for posting an online article critical of the party.53 Although the precise number of academics fired thereafter is unknown, as of the end of 2019, dozens of university faculty had reportedly lost their jobs because of their political views.54 A small number of professors received even more severe punishment. A prominent law professor at Tsinghua University who had published an open letter critical of Xi and the party's handling of the Covid-19 pandemic in early 2020 was arrested on a trumped-up charge of "patronizing a prostitute" in July 2020 and subsequently fired.55 In Guizhou, an academic was sentenced to four and half years in prison in August 2023 for his outspoken views.56

自由派学者也未能幸免于这场镇压。那些在讲座或网络言论中表达与官方正统观点相悖或违宪的学者，要么遭到警告，要么被解雇。根据习近平执政期间部分被解雇学者的记录，这场运动始于2013年末，当时上海著名学府华东政法大学的一位法学教授因发表批评党的网文而被解雇。尽管此后被解雇的学者确切人数尚不清楚，但截至2019年底，据报道已有数十名大学教师因其政治观点而失去工作。少数教授甚至受到了更严厉的惩罚。清华大学一位知名法学教授在2020年初发表公开信，批评习近平和中共对新冠疫情的处理方式，同年7月被以捏造的“嫖娼”罪名逮捕，随后被解雇。在贵州，一位学者因其直言不讳的观点于2023年8月被判处四年半有期徒刑。

To ensure the routinization of ideological control on university campuses, the party increased its use of student informants and installed video cameras in classrooms to record professors' lectures. Again, even though the authorities began to deploy student informants after the crushing of the student-led prodemocracy movement in 1989, the use of student informants under Xi is far more systematic, extensive, and aggressive.57 Another measure of institutionalizing ideological repression on university campuses is the issuance of the "Ten Professional Principles" by the Ministry of Education in November 2018. Principle no. 3 explicitly prohibits faculty from "using classrooms, forums, lectures, information networks, and other channels to express and share erroneous views or to fabricate false or unhealthy information."58 Obviously, this "principle" gives the authorities a handy tool to punish academics for their political views.

为了确保意识形态控制在大学校园的常态化，中共加大了对学生线人的利用，并在教室安装摄像头录制教授的讲课。尽管当局在1989年镇压学生民主运动后就开始部署学生线人，但习近平领导下的学生线人使用更加系统化、广泛化和激进。教育部于2018年11月发布的《十项职业原则》是大学校园意识形态压制制度化的另一项举措。原则三明确禁止教师“利用课堂、论坛、讲座、信息网络等渠道表达和传播错误观点，或者捏造虚假、有害信息”。显然，这条“原则”为当局提供了一个便捷的工具，可以惩罚持有政治观点的学者。

Despite official restrictions, Western NGOs were able to establish a modest presence inside China prior to Xi's rise. After Xi became party chief, however, the regime's paranoia about foreign NGOs, perceived to be potential instigators of "color revolutions," reached a new level. In April 2016 the NPC passed a new law on foreign NGOs that imposed onerous administrative burdens and significantly raised security risks for operating in China. Among other things, the law orders foreign NGOs to register with Chinese police, the designated enforcement agency that has broad authority over nearly all aspects of the operations of foreign NGOs. For example, the requirement that foreign NGOs must provide the police with advance notice of their planned activities is obviously intended to discourage their activities.59 The law, which affected more than seven thousand foreign NGOs when it went into effect, allowed no grace period, forcing many to suspend operations immediately. By early 2018, only 350 foreign NGOs had reregistered under the new law, suggesting that 95 percent of the foreign NGOs might have exited the country.60 Judging by this metric, the law has evidently achieved its objective.

尽管受到官方限制，西方非政府组织在习近平上台前仍能在中国建立起一定规模的影响力。然而，习近平担任中共中央总书记后，当局对外国非政府组织的担忧——认为它们可能煽动“颜色革命”——达到了新的高度。2016年4月，全国人大通过了一项关于外国非政府组织的新法律，该法律对在华开展活动的外国非政府组织施加了繁重的行政负担，并显著提高了其安全风险。该法律规定，外国非政府组织必须在公安机关登记注册，而公安机关是指定的执法机构，对外国非政府组织的几乎所有活动都拥有广泛的管辖权。例如，要求外国非政府组织必须提前向警方通报其活动计划，显然是为了阻止它们的活动。该法律生效时影响了七千多个外国非政府组织，且未给予任何宽限期，迫使许多组织立即停止运营。截至 2018 年初，仅有 350 家外国非政府组织根据新法律重新注册，这表明 95% 的外国非政府组织可能已经离开该国。60 从这一指标来看，该法律显然已经达到了其目标。

As surveillance of the population constitutes a key pillar of Xi's neo-Stalinist order, the party has made the upgrading of mass surveillance a top state priority. In the post-Tiananmen era, the regime had rolled out two high-tech surveillance programs, Golden Shield and Skynet, that allowed police to utilize a vast digital database, a cyber surveillance apparatus, and networked cameras and sensors to keep track of the activities and speeches of Chinese people. After Xi came to power, the surveillance state received several technological and organizational upgrades. The first program singled out for upgrading was grid management, which divides a community into several grids, each with roughly a thousand residents. The grid is supervised by an official and patrolled by a grid attendant, each equipped with a mobile device to report any incidents. This program was listed as a key task at the Central Committee plenum in November 2013.61 In June 2014 the State Council issued an outline to build a "social credit" system.62 Although this technologically challenging system remains a work in progress, its potential surveillance capabilities can make the dystopia depicted in George Orwell's 1984 a reality in China. In May 2015 the government launched a new high-tech surveillance project, Sharp Eyes, which uses newer technologies, such as facial recognition and cloud computing, to upgrade Skynet and extend video surveillance to the countryside.63

由于对民众的监控是习近平新斯大林主义秩序的关键支柱，中共已将升级大规模监控列为国家首要任务。在天安门事件后，中共推出了两项高科技监控计划——“金盾”和“天网”，使警方能够利用庞大的数字数据库、网络监控设备以及联网摄像头和传感器来追踪中国民众的活动和言论。习近平上台后，监控体系在技术和组织方面进行了多项升级。首当其冲的升级项目是网格化管理，它将一个社区划分为若干个网格，每个网格大约有1000名居民。每个网格由一名官员监管，并由一名网格管理员巡逻，他们都配备了移动设备，用于报告任何事件。该项目在2013年11月中央全会上被列为重点任务。2014年6月，国务院发布了构建“社会信用体系”纲要。尽管这一技术难度极高的体系仍在完善中，但其潜在的监控能力可能使乔治·奥威尔《1984》中描绘的反乌托邦景象在中国成为现实。2015年5月，政府启动了一项名为“锐眼”的高科技监控项目，该项目利用人脸识别和云计算等新技术升级“天网”，并将视频监控扩展到农村地区。





Crackdown on the Periphery





打击外围势力


The party has always perceived China's peripheral regions, whether areas with large populations of ethnic minorities such as Tibet and Xinjiang or newly regained territories such as Hong Kong and Macau, as areas harboring separatists or dissidents who are supported by hostile external forces. In the post-Tiananmen era the party abandoned a more conciliatory approach in favor of a more repressive policy to maintain China's grip on these areas. However, as resistance to Chinese rule continued in spite of the tightened security measures, the party under Xi decided to escalate the repression to an unprecedented level.

中共一直将中国周边地区，无论是西藏、新疆等少数民族聚居区，还是香港、澳门等新近收复的领土，都视为滋生分裂分子或异见人士的温床，并认为他们受到外部敌对势力的支持。天安门事件后，中共放弃了较为温和的政策，转而采取更为强硬的手段来维护对这些地区的控制。然而，尽管安保措施不断加强，反抗中国统治的呼声依然不减，习近平领导下的中共决定将镇压升级到前所未有的程度。

Xinjiang, the northwestern province that was not formally incorporated into China until the late nineteenth century, quickly became the epicenter of conflict between its largest ethnic minority group, the Uighurs, and the Han Chinese. To be sure, political violence and separatism in the region had been on the rise after the end of the Cold War as resentment of Chinese rule grew among ethnic minority groups that sought more autonomy.64 But Beijing was able to use both carrots (economic development) and sticks (the “war on terror”) to maintain an uneasy peace in Xinjiang.65 This fragile equilibrium collapsed on July 5, 2009, when violent clashes between ethnic Uighurs and Han Chinese erupted in Urumqi, the capital of Xinjiang, killing several hundred people. The violence persisted afterward despite heightened security measures.66

新疆，这个位于中国西北部的省份，直到19世纪末才正式并入中国，很快就成为其最大的少数民族群体维吾尔族和汉族之间冲突的中心。诚然，冷战结束后，随着寻求更多自治权的少数民族群体对中国统治的不满日益加剧，该地区的政治暴力和分裂主义情绪一直在上升。但北京能够软硬兼施（“经济发展”），维持新疆脆弱的和平。这种脆弱的平衡在2009年7月5日被打破，当时新疆首府乌鲁木齐爆发了维吾尔族和汉族之间的暴力冲突，造成数百人死亡。尽管加强了安全措施，暴力事件仍然持续不断。

In response to the deteriorating conditions in Xinjiang, Xi opted for draconian measures to eradicate the so-called three evils—fundamentalism, separatism, and terrorism. He paid a personal visit to the region in May 2014, and in August 2016 he appointed Chen Quanguo, a hard-liner with extensive background in security, as Xinjiang's new party chief. Prior to his appointment in Xinjiang, Chen had demonstrated, as party chief in Tibet from 2011 to 2016, an ability to pacify ethnic unrest. During his tenure in Tibet, he had introduced new security measures and largely succeeded in ending a wave of self-immolations by Tibetans protesting Chinese rule.67 Xi's mandate for Chen in Xinjiang was to restore stability at all costs.

面对新疆日益恶化的局势，习近平采取了严厉措施，根除所谓的“三股势力”——原教旨主义、分裂主义和恐怖主义。他于2014年5月亲自视察新疆，并于2016年8月任命在安全领域经验丰富的强硬派陈全国为新疆委书记。在被任命为新疆委书记之前，陈全国曾在2011年至2016年担任西藏自治区委书记，展现了其平息民族动乱的能力。在西藏任职期间，他推行了新的安全措施，并基本成功地平息了藏人自焚抗议中国统治的浪潮。习近平赋予陈全国在新疆的任务是不惜一切代价恢复稳定。

Consequently, with Xi's support, Chen put more than one million ordinary Uighurs and other ethnic minorities in concentration camps, euphemistically called "vocational training schools." Local officials had complete discretion to incarcerate Uighurs in these camps. The detainees were reportedly subject to brainwashing and routine abuse.68 Simultaneously, the government adopted strict surveillance measures and restrictions on the lives of Uighurs.69

因此，在习近平的支持下，陈将超过一百万普通维吾尔族和其他少数民族民众关押在集中营中，这些集中营被委婉地称为“职业技能培训学校”。地方官员拥有完全的自由裁量权，可以随意将维吾尔族人关押在这些集中营中。据报道，被拘留者遭受了洗脑和日常虐待。与此同时，政府对维吾尔族人的生活采取了严格的监控措施和限制。

Tactically, the harsh security measures seemed to have accomplished Xi's goal of pacifying ethnic unrest in Xinjiang, judging by the near disappearance of reported acts of violence. Politically, however, China has paid dearly. Its persecution of the Uighurs, for which the West has imposed sanctions, has been labeled "genocide" by many Western countries. In terms of long-term consequences, the brutal treatment of the Uighurs will almost certainly foster more extremism and boost support for separatism in the future.

从策略上看，严厉的安全措施似乎实现了习近平平息新疆民族动乱的目标，暴力事件的报道几乎绝迹。然而，从政治上看，中国为此付出了沉重的代价。西方国家已对中国迫害维吾尔族实施制裁，许多西方国家甚至将其定性为“种族灭绝”。从长远来看，对维吾尔族的残酷对待几乎肯定会在未来助长极端主义，并增加分裂主义的支持。

When China signed an agreement with the United Kingdom in 1984 on the return of Hong Kong to China in July 1997, Deng Xiaoping pledged that the British colony would retain its economic and social systems for fifty years and enjoy a "high degree of autonomy."70 Subsequently, the NPC passed the Hong Kong "Basic Law," the city's mini constitution, in April 1990, formalizing its autonomy and China's commitment to maintaining the economic and social systems of Hong Kong for fifty years.

1984年，中国与英国签署协议，香港将于1997年7月回归中国。邓小平承诺，香港这个英国殖民地将保留其经济和社会制度五十年，并享有“高度自治”。随后，全国人民代表大会于1990年4月通过了《香港基本法》，即香港的“小宪法”，正式确立了香港的自治地位，并重申了中国对香港经济和社会制度五十年的承诺。

But the Sino-British agreement on Hong Kong and the Basic Law left two critical issues unresolved. One was democratic self-rule in Hong Kong, and the other was a National Security Law that the city's legislature was supposed to adopt after 1997. On the first issue, China made a vague promise that gradually the city's chief executive and Legislative Council would be elected through universal suffrage. After 1997 Hong Kong's chief executive was elected by an "election committee" of 1,500 unelected individuals, most of them pro-Beijing. The city's seventy-seat Legislative Council was also elected largely undemocratically, with half of its members elected directly and the other half indirectly by "functional constituencies." On the second issue, Article 23 of the Basic Law requires that Hong Kong pass its own law on national security. As the article could easily result in a law restricting the city's civil rights and freedoms, it was seen as a persistent existential threat to the "one country, two systems" model.71

但中英关于香港和《基本法》的协议遗留了两个关键问题悬而未决。一是香港的民主自治，二是香港立法会本应在1997年后通过的国家安全法。关于第一个问题，中国含糊地承诺，香港行政长官和立法会议员将逐步通过普选产生。然而，1997年后，香港行政长官是由一个由1500名未经选举产生的“选举委员会”选出的，其中大多数人亲北京。香港的70个立法会席位也大多以非民主方式选出，一半议员由直接选举产生，另一半则由“功能界别”间接选举产生。关于第二个问题，《基本法》第二十三条规定香港必须制定自己的国家安全法。由于该文章极有可能导致一项限制该市公民权利和自由的法律出台，因此被视为对“一国两制”模式的持续性生存威胁。

Yet, it would take nearly two decades before conflict over democracy and civil liberties between the CCP and the people of Hong Kong led to the death of the "one country, two systems" model. On the surface, China largely honored its part of the deal until the rise of Xi Jinping in 2012. The only significant foreshadowing of the eventual demise of the "one country, two systems" model were the mass protests against the city leadership's attempt to pass a National Security Law in 2003, which forced Hong Kong's pro-Beijing chief executive to abandon the plan. However, tensions over political rights, protection of civil rights, and identity were never far below the superficial calm.72

然而，中共与香港人民之间围绕民主和公民自由的冲突，直到近二十年后才最终导致“一国两制”模式的终结。表面上看，在2012年习近平上台之前，中国基本上履行了其在协议中的承诺。唯一预示“一国两制”最终瓦解的迹象，是2003年香港特区政府试图通过《国家安全法》时引发的大规模抗议活动，这场抗议迫使亲北京的香港特首放弃了该计划。然而，围绕政治权利、公民权利保护和身份认同的紧张局势，始终潜藏在表面的平静之下。

Shortly after Xi became CCP chief in late 2012, prodemocracy forces began to pressure Beijing more aggressively to honor its promise of universal suffrage. In March 2013 three academics called for a civil disobedience movement, "Occupy Central," the key demand of which was the replacement of Hong Kong's undemocratic electoral system with direct democratic elections. Instead of a positive response, the Chinese government issued a hard-line white paper on Hong Kong in June 2014 that flatly rejected the idea of instituting universal suffrage in the city. Most ominously, the white paper claimed that the central government has "comprehensive governing authority" over the city, a key concept that later helped legitimize Beijing's adoption of the 2020 National Security Law that effectively ended "one country, two systems" in Hong Kong.73

2012年底习近平就任中共总书记后不久，民主派力量开始更加积极地向北京施压，要求其兑现普选承诺。2013年3月，三位学者发起“占领中环”公民抗命运动，其核心诉求是以直接民主选举取代香港不民主的选举制度。然而，中国政府并未积极回应，反而于2014年6月发布了一份强硬的香港问题白皮书，断然拒绝在香港实行普选。更令人担忧的是，该白皮书声称中央政府对香港拥有“全面治理权”，这一关键概念后来成为北京通过2020年《国家安全法》的合法性依据，该法实际上终结了香港的“一国两制”。

If Beijing expected this document to pacify the demands for democracy in Hong Kong, it achieved the opposite effect. From the end of September to mid-December 2014, tens of thousands of students launched what came to be known as the "Umbrella Movement"—a series of peaceful sit-ins in the busiest section of the central part of Hong Kong. Although the movement failed to force Beijing to back down, the outpouring of public support for the demonstrators and outrage against the use of excessive force by the police became a harbinger of the far larger confrontation between Hong Kong citizens and Beijing that would take place five years later.74

如果北京期望这份文件能够平息香港民众对民主的诉求，那么它却适得其反。从2014年9月底到12月中旬，数万名学生发起了一场被称为“雨伞运动”的示威活动——在香港中心城区最繁华的地段举行了一系列和平静坐示威。尽管这场运动未能迫使北京让步，但公众对示威者的声援以及对警方过度使用武力的强烈谴责，预示着五年后香港市民与北京之间将爆发更为大规模的冲突。

The display of defiance by Hong Kong's prodemocracy activists appeared to have hardened Xi's resolve. In July 2017, at the ceremony marking the twentieth anniversary of Hong Kong's return, Xi delivered a thinly veiled threat against the city's prodemocracy forces. He warned, "Any activities that harm national sovereignty and security, challenge the power of the central government and the authority of the Basic Law, and use Hong Kong to conduct infiltration and sabotage against the mainland . . . violate our bottom line and are absolutely not permitted."75

香港民主派人士的反抗似乎更加坚定了习近平的决心。2017年7月，在香港回归二十周年纪念仪式上，习近平对香港民主派发出了隐晦的威胁。他警告说：“任何损害国家主权和安全、挑战中央权力和基本法权威、利用香港对内地进行渗透和破坏的活动……都触及了我们的底线，绝对不允许。”

Two years later, Hong Kong's prodemocracy forces tested Xi's "bottom line" when they organized mass protests against proposed legislation on extraditing Hong Kong residents to the mainland for criminal prosecution. Launched in March 2019, these protests grew progressively larger and eventually resulted in violent confrontations with the police. On several occasions, an estimated one to two million protesters marched in the streets. Clashes between police and protesters paralyzed the city, Asia's premium commercial hub, for days. This round of protests, known as the "anti-extradition" movement, ended in January 2020 after Hong Kong was locked down due to the Covid-19 pandemic.76

两年后，香港民主力量组织大规模抗议活动，反对将香港居民引渡至内地受审的立法提案，以此试探习近平的“底线”。这些抗议活动始于2019年3月，规模不断扩大，最终演变为与警方的暴力冲突。据估计，曾有数百万至两百万抗议者走上街头。警民冲突导致这座亚洲顶级商业中心瘫痪数日。这轮被称为“反引渡”运动的抗议活动，在香港因新冠疫情封城后于2020年1月结束。

The anti-extradition movement was apparently the last straw for Xi. In May 2020 the NPC passed a National Security Law for Hong Kong in a clear violation of both the technical provisions of the Basic Law (which stipulates that only the city's Legislative Council can pass such a law) and China's pledge to maintain Hong Kong's social and economic systems for fifty years. The law, which effectively guts the city's rule of law and deprives its citizens of their civil liberties, went into effect on July 1, 2020. Following implementation, Beijing dispatched its own security agents to the city as Hong Kong police, almost certainly under the direction of Beijing, arrested and charged protest organizers and civic leaders. Deng's much-vaunted "one country, two systems" model lasted a mere twenty-three years.77

反修例运动显然成了压垮习近平的最后一根稻草。2020年5月，全国人大通过了香港国安法，这明显违反了《基本法》的技术性规定（该法规定只有香港立法会才能通过此类法律）以及中国对香港社会经济制度五十年的承诺。该法实际上摧毁了香港的法治，剥夺了香港市民的公民自由，并于2020年7月1日生效。法实施后，北京向香港派遣了安全人员，而香港警方几乎可以肯定是在北京的指示下逮捕并起诉了抗议组织者和公民领袖。邓小平大肆宣扬的“一国两制”模式仅仅维持了二十三年。

Although Xi crushed the prodemocracy movement in Hong Kong, the costs for China, the CCP, and Xi himself were horrific. The United States terminated its preferential treatment for the city. The end of the rule of law in Hong Kong also fatally damaged the city's status as a center of commerce, resulting in the exodus of Western businesses and talent to other parts of Asia, mostly Singapore.78 Internationally, China lost its credibility. The crackdown in Hong Kong, seen widely as unnecessary, excessive, and self-destructive, served only to reinforce the view that a powerful autocratic China cannot be trusted and must be confronted.

尽管习近平镇压了香港的民主运动，但中国、中共以及习近平本人为此付出了惨痛的代价。美国终止了对香港的特殊待遇。香港法治的终结也严重损害了其作为商业中心的地位，导致西方企业和人才大量外流至亚洲其他地区，其中大部分流向了新加坡。在国际上，中国的信誉也随之丧失。这场被广泛认为不必要、过度且自毁的香港镇压行动，反而更加强化了人们对一个强大的专制中国不可信赖、必须与之对抗的看法。





What Made the Return of Totalitarian Rule Possible





是什么让极权统治的回归成为可能？


Few could have imagined the transformative changes Xi brought about almost single-handedly within a decade of rising to the top. The reversion to neo-Stalinist rule is all the more remarkable—and puzzling—given Xi's weak powerbase and the massive socioeconomic modernization China experienced in the post-Mao era. In all likelihood, Xi himself probably did not anticipate the relative ease with which he could dismantle the post-Tiananmen order and restore a regime bearing the essential characteristics of neo-Stalinism: personalistic rule, permanent purges, ruthless repression, and an expansionist foreign policy.

很少有人能预料到，习近平在短短十年内几乎凭借一己之力就带来了翻天覆地的变化。考虑到习近平薄弱的权力基础以及中国在后毛泽东时代经历的大规模社会经济现代化，他倒退回新斯大林主义统治就显得更加引人注目，也更加令人费解。习近平本人很可能也没有预料到，他能够如此轻易地瓦解天安门事件后的秩序，并重建一个具有新斯大林主义本质特征的政权：个人主义统治、持续不断的清洗、残酷镇压以及扩张主义的外交政策。

Xi could reconstruct a neo-Stalinist order against ostensibly poor odds primarily because the regime's totalitarian institutional framework had remained largely intact in spite of the post-Mao economic reforms and opening to the West. Indeed, even a cursory comparison between China in 1979 and China in 2012 shows that foundational institutions of totalitarianism remained essentially untouched by the country's "reform and opening." Most critically, the institutional pillar of totalitarianism—a Leninist party-state—was completely preserved. The CCP's closed and hierarchical organizational structure and procedures for leadership selection were not fundamentally different in 2012 from what they were in 1979. Despite attempts to separate the party from the state, the party remained deeply entrenched in and dominant over the state. Its organizational penetration of Chinese society, down to the neighborhood and village levels, had deepened and expanded rather than withering, allowing the party to retain its unrivaled capacities for social control and political mobilization.

习近平之所以能够在看似不利的情况下重建新斯大林主义秩序，主要原因在于，尽管后毛泽东时代的经济改革和对外开放取得了进展，但该政权的极权主义制度框架却基本保持完整。事实上，即使对1979年的中国和2012年的中国进行粗略的比较，也能看出极权主义的基础制度基本上没有受到中国“改革开放”的影响。最关键的是，极权主义的制度支柱——列宁主义的党国体制——被完整地保留了下来。中共封闭的等级制组织结构和领导人选拔程序在2012年与1979年并无本质区别。尽管中共试图将党与国家分离，但它仍然深深扎根于国家之中，并凌驾于国家之上。其对中国社会，乃至社区和乡村层面的组织渗透非但没有减弱，反而更加深入和广泛，这使得中共得以保持其无与伦比的社会控制和政治动员能力。

Almost equally critical was the party's control of instruments of state violence without any constitutional or legal constraints. To be sure, the indiscriminate mass terror of the Mao era was replaced by selective repression. But the party had at its disposal the military, the secret police, and a vast surveillance apparatus to guard its political monopoly. When necessary, as demonstrated by the crackdown on the Tiananmen movement and the suppression of the Falungong spiritual group, the party could mobilize state violence to crush any challenges to its power. The revival of totalitarianism under Xi would not have been possible without a coercive apparatus that received massive state investments during the post-Tiananmen era.79

同样至关重要的是，党对国家暴力工具的控制不受任何宪法或法律约束。诚然，毛泽东时代不分青红皂白的大规模恐怖统治已被选择性镇压所取代。但党仍然拥有军队、秘密警察和庞大的监控体系来维护其政治垄断地位。必要时，正如镇压天安门运动和打压法轮功精神团体所表明的那样，党可以动用国家暴力来粉碎任何对其权力的挑战。如果没有在后天安门时代获得国家巨额投资的强制机器，习近平领导下的极权主义复兴是不可能实现的。

Although the post-Mao reforms eroded the regime's capacity to control the economy and its access to information, the party-state could easily reassert its control when necessary. Economically, the regime retained the "commanding heights" of the economy, such as the financial system, energy, transportation, and telecom services. It also monopolized ownership of land and wielded immense regulatory power. Aware of the threats posed by free flows of information, the party maintained strict control of the media and, when confronted by the internet, quickly adopted effective countermeasures to neutralize the information revolution.80

尽管后毛泽东时代的改革削弱了政权对经济的控制能力及其获取信息的渠道，但党国在必要时仍能轻易地重新掌控局面。在经济方面，政权仍然掌控着经济的“制高点”，例如金融体系、能源、交通运输和电信服务。它还垄断了土地所有权，并拥有巨大的监管权力。意识到信息自由流动带来的威胁，党对媒体实行严格控制，并在面对互联网时迅速采取有效措施来遏制信息革命。

Prior to Xi's rise, three features of a classic totalitarian regime were missing: One was a domineering totalitarian leader. But that was largely a historical accident because the fragile balance of power at the top prevented the reemergence of a Stalinist or Maoist dictator. Also missing were the permanent purges, thanks to the collective leadership maintained by the same balance of power. The third missing feature was an official ideology legitimating party rule. Although the CCP never formally abandoned its Communist ideology, in reality the ideology atrophied due to the general worldwide failure of Communist regimes and Mao's disastrous rule. Economic performance became the party's real source of legitimacy, while pragmatism, not orthodox ideology, dictated policy.

在习近平崛起之前，典型的极权政权缺少三个特征：一是专横跋扈的极权领袖。但这很大程度上是历史的偶然，因为高层脆弱的权力平衡阻止了斯大林式或毛泽东式独裁者的再次出现。二是持续不断的清洗，这也得益于同样的权力平衡所维系的集体领导。第三个缺失的特征是官方意识形态，它为党的统治提供了合法性。尽管中共从未正式放弃其共产主义意识形态，但实际上，由于世界范围内共产主义政权的普遍失败以及毛泽东灾难性的统治，这种意识形态已经衰落。经济表现成为党的真正合法性来源，而政策的制定则更多地依赖于实用主义，而非正统的意识形态。

Of these three missing features of classic totalitarianism, the first two could be easily revived, as demonstrated by Xi's record. Once the fragile balance of power ceased to exist, the party had no means to prevent a ruthless leader from restoring one-man rule and reviving permanent purges to terrorize the party. Reinvigorating the orthodox Communist ideology was, by comparison, a far more challenging undertaking, even for Xi, because it held little appeal to a party and a society thoroughly secularized by the socioeconomic changes and the post-Mao era contacts with the outside world.

经典极权主义缺失的这三个特征中，前两个很容易恢复，习近平的所作所为就证明了这一点。一旦脆弱的权力平衡不复存在，党就无力阻止一位冷酷无情的领导人恢复一人统治，并恢复持续不断的清洗以恐吓党员。相比之下，重振正统的共产主义意识形态则是一项更为艰巨的任务，即使对习近平而言也是如此，因为对于一个因社会经济变革和后毛泽东时代与外部世界的接触而彻底世俗化的党和社会而言，这种意识形态几乎没有任何吸引力。

Ironically, although Xi reversed Deng's policy of reform and opening, he owes much of his success to Deng's commitment to one-party rule and to his personal political interests. In saving the party from Mao's disastrous rule, Deng's consistent strategy was to change economic policy without endangering one-party rule. The most important of his "four cardinal principles" is the political supremacy of the party. For Deng, reform and opening were simply the means to save the CCP and to perpetuate its rule. Specifically, Deng left two political legacies that later greatly facilitated Xi's efforts to restore totalitarian rule. The first was his unwavering opposition to any political reform or to any ideological liberalization that might weaken party rule or expose its dark side. Deng's conservatism precluded a thorough reckoning of the disasters of the Maoist era or a liberalization that could lead to a stronger civil society or had the potential to resist any reversion to totalitarian rule. Most critically, Deng's purge of Hu Yaobang in 1987 and Zhao Ziyang in 1989 decimated the liberals in the party and decisively shifted the balance of power in favor of the hard-liners.

具有讽刺意味的是，尽管习近平推翻了邓小平的改革开放政策，但他的成功很大程度上要归功于邓小平对一党专政的坚持以及他个人的政治利益。为了将党从毛泽东灾难性的统治中拯救出来，邓小平一贯的策略是在不危及一党专政的前提下改变经济政策。他“四大原则”中最重要的是党的政治至上。对邓小平而言，改革开放仅仅是拯救中共并延续其统治的手段。具体来说，邓小平留下的两项政治遗产，后来极大地便利了习近平恢复极权统治的努力。首先，他坚决反对任何可能削弱党的统治或暴露其阴暗面的政治改革或意识形态自由化。邓小平的保守主义阻碍了对毛泽东时代灾难的彻底反思，也阻碍了可能促进公民社会发展或有可能抵制任何回归极权统治的自由化进程。最关键的是，邓小平在 1987 年清洗胡耀邦，在 1989 年清洗赵紫阳，严重削弱了党内的自由派，并决定性地改变了权力平衡，使之有利于强硬派。

The second legacy was Deng's flawed reforms to preserve collective leadership and prevent the return of a Mao-like figure. The formal provisions on term limits, mandatory retirement, and rights of party members were intentionally left vague and impossible to enforce. For example, the only explicit term limit was that imposed on the state president, the least important of the three positions held by the regime's top leader (the other two being the general secretary and the chairman of the CMC). But as the party made it easy to change the constitution, this limit too could be abolished without much trouble, as Xi did in 2018. Deng himself set a bad example by violating the rules he tried to establish. He held on to power despite his advanced age and lack of formal titles. He made a mockery of the party's formal procedures by holding private meetings with senior leaders in his home rather than allowing the Politburo Standing Committee to act in its capacity as the party's top decision-making body. His most momentous decisions were made mostly by himself or in consultation with a small number of aging revolutionaries. Most important, although Deng paid lip-service to "democratic political life within the party," he made no attempt to establish inner-party democracy, depriving the party of a mechanism to hold its leaders accountable and to block the return of a Mao-like figure.

邓小平留下的第二个遗产是他为维护集体领导、防止毛泽东式人物复辟而推行的改革，但这些改革存在缺陷。关于任期限制、强制退休和党员权利的正式规定被刻意模糊化，使其难以执行。例如，唯一明确的任期限制是针对国家主席的，而国家主席是政权最高领导人三个职位中最不重要的（另外两个职位是中央总书记和中央军委主席）。但由于党章修改的便利性，这一限制也很容易被废除，正如习近平在2018年所做的那样。邓小平本人也树立了一个坏榜样，他违反了自己试图建立的规则。尽管年事已高且没有正式头衔，他仍然牢牢把持着权力。他没有让政治局常委履行其作为党的最高决策机构的职责，而是私下与高级领导人举行会议，这无疑是对党的正式程序的嘲弄。他最重要的决策大多是由他自己做出的，或者只是与少数几位年迈的革命者商议后做出的。最重要的是，尽管邓小平口头上支持“党内民主政治生活”，但他并没有尝试建立党内民主，这使得党失去了追究领导人责任和阻止毛泽东式人物回归的机制。

The survival of collective leadership and adherence to the procedures and norms of succession in the post-Deng era created the deceptive impression that Deng's reforms were effective and durable. Overlooked was the difficulty, if not the impossibility, of institutionalizing politics in an autocracy.81 Indeed, the inherent flaws of Deng's reforms enabled Xi to amass the power of a totalitarian leader without any real opposition.

邓小平之后集体领导制度的延续以及对权力交接程序和规范的恪守，给人一种错觉，仿佛邓小平的改革卓有成效且持久。然而，人们却忽略了在专制政体中实现政治制度化的难度，甚至可以说是不可能。事实上，邓小平改革的固有缺陷使得习近平得以在几乎没有任何真正反对的情况下，攫取极权统治者的权力。





Peaking Xi?





习近平达到巅峰了吗？


Despite Xi's success in reviving totalitarian rule, signs that his neo-Stalinist agenda had run its course began to emerge toward the end of his second term. The initial pushback against him came from the United States in 2018 when Donald Trump launched a trade war against China. Although Trump was motivated less by grand geopolitical designs than by his personal political interests, the US-China trade war quickly led to a comprehensive deterioration of US-China relations that immediately escalated to a new cold war.

尽管习近平成功地复兴了极权统治，但在其第二个任期末期，他的新斯大林主义议程已然走向终结的迹象开始显现。最初对他的反击来自美国，2018年唐纳德·特朗普对中国发动了贸易战。尽管特朗普的动机与其说是出于宏大的地缘政治考量，不如说是出于其个人政治利益，但这场美中贸易战迅速导致美中关系全面恶化，并立即升级为一场新的冷战。

The Covid-19 pandemic that struck China in late December 2019 marked the beginning of the unraveling of Xi's neo-Stalinist agenda on the domestic front. Although the initial success of the Chinese government in containing the pandemic gave the party a political boost, the emergence of a more infectious viral variant in 2022 rendered Xi's zero-Covid strategy ineffective. Instead of abandoning this untenable approach, Xi stuck to it, most likely because he did not want to see an explosive rise in the number of infections and deaths ahead of the Twentieth Party Congress, scheduled for the fall of 2022 (which was to grant him a third term). Nationwide lockdowns resulted in a steep decline in economic activities and stoked public anger. By late November 2022, a month after the conclusion of the party congress, the Chinese public had had enough. After a fire killed ten people in their apartments under lockdown in Urumqi on November 24, thousands of young students and professionals spontaneously began demonstrating in more than a dozen cities, some even shouting "Xi Jinping, step down!"82 Apparently shocked by this outburst of public anger, Xi relented and ordered an immediate end to zero-Covid, marking his first humiliating retreat from a demonstrably failed policy.83

2019年12月底席卷中国的新冠疫情标志着习近平在国内推行的新斯大林主义议程开始瓦解。尽管中国政府在控制疫情方面取得的初步成功为党带来了政治优势，但2022年更具传染性的病毒变种的出现，使得习近平的“清零”战略失效。习近平非但没有放弃这一行不通的策略，反而坚持己见，很可能是因为他不想在2022年秋季召开的中共二十大（旨在让他连任第三届）之前看到感染和死亡人数的爆炸性增长。全国范围内的封锁导致经济活动急剧下滑，并激起了公众的愤怒。到2022年11月底，也就是中共二十大闭幕一个月后，中国民众已经忍无可忍。 11月24日，乌鲁木齐一栋公寓楼发生火灾，造成10人死亡，此前该市一直处于封锁状态。此后，数千名青年学生和专业人士自发在十几个城市举行示威游行，一些人甚至高喊“习近平下台！”。显然，习近平被这股民愤所震惊，被迫让步，下令立即结束“清零”政策，这标志着他首次在明显失败的政策上做出屈辱性的让步。

But that may have been too late, as far as the Chinese economy was concerned. Instead of a robust recovery that failed to materialize after the end of zero-Covid, the economy struggled on all fronts, with an imploding real estate sector, slumping exports, falling investment, and high youth unemployment.84 To be sure, most of the factors responsible for China's economic difficulties, such as high levels of debt, the gigantic real estate bubble, and deteriorating relations with the West, had preceded the pandemic. Nevertheless, these problems were exacerbated by Xi's zero-Covid policy. Its restrictions on international travel made normal business activities almost impossible, frequently disrupted supply chains, and led to the closure of many small businesses.

但就中国经济而言，这或许为时已晚。疫情结束后，中国经济并未如预期般强劲复苏，反而陷入各方面困境：房地产市场崩盘、出口下滑、投资减少、青年失业率居高不下。诚然，导致中国经济困境的诸多因素，例如高额债务、巨大的房地产泡沫以及与西方关系恶化，大多在疫情爆发前就已存在。然而，习近平的疫情政策加剧了这些问题。其对国际旅行的限制几乎使正常的商业活动无法开展，供应链频频中断，并导致众多小型企业倒闭。

The persistent economic weaknesses may derail Xi's agenda of strengthening one-party rule at home and surpassing the United States as the world's largest economy. Dwindling financial resources could force him to curtail spending on his pet projects, such as military modernization, technological self-sufficiency, and "common prosperity," a plan to reduce socioeconomic inequality. Tighter budgets might also limit the party's ability to distribute resources to its favored interest groups, such as SOEs and key provinces. Protracted slow growth will result in stagnant standards of living and undermine the confidence of both the private sector and foreign investors in China's economic future. The performance legitimacy that has undergirded party rule since the Tiananmen crackdown will likely evaporate.

持续的经济疲软可能会阻碍习近平在国内巩固一党专政、超越美国成为世界最大经济体的计划。财政资源的日益匮乏可能迫使他削减其重点项目的支出，例如军事现代化、技术自给自足以及旨在缩小社会经济差距的“共同繁荣”计划。预算紧缩也可能限制党向其所青睐的利益集团（例如国有企业和重点省份）分配资源的能力。长期低迷的经济增长将导致生活水平停滞不前，并削弱私营部门和外国投资者对中国经济前景的信心。自天安门事件以来支撑党执政的政绩合法性很可能就此瓦解。

Judging by his response to China's economic difficulties, Xi seems to have no new ideas to sustain his neo-Stalinist project, except for placing national security at the top of the party's priorities. Instead of launching economic initiatives to rekindle growth, Xi has approved a series of measures, such as passage of a broad anti-espionage law and a campaign to catch foreign spies in 2023, succeeding only to further alienate Western investors and reinforce the pessimism of private entrepreneurs. Politically, Xi may benefit, at least in the short term, by underscoring the danger of hostile foreign forces and blaming Washington's economic cold war for China's problems. In the long run, however, the continuation of a security-centered survival strategy will make economic stagnation more likely, forcing Xi to depend even more on repression to keep the party—and himself—in power.

从习近平对中国经济困境的应对来看，除了将国家安全置于党的首要位置之外，他似乎没有其他新思路来支撑其新斯大林主义路线。习近平没有推出任何刺激经济增长的举措，而是批准了一系列措施，例如通过一项范围广泛的反间谍法，以及在2023年开展打击外国间谍的行动，但这些措施最终只会进一步疏远西方投资者，并加剧私营企业家的悲观情绪。在政治上，习近平或许能在短期内通过强调敌对外国势力的威胁，并将中国的问题归咎于华盛顿的经济冷战而获益。然而，从长远来看，继续奉行以安全为中心的生存战略只会增加经济停滞的可能性，迫使习近平更加依赖镇压手段来维持党的统治——以及他自身的权力。







7 End of the Chinese Economic Miracle

7 中国经济奇迹的终结


THE DETERIORATION of the Chinese economy shortly after the country emerged from its Covid-19 lockdowns in December 2022 caught both Chinese leaders and outside observers by surprise. Weighed down by the collapse of the largest real estate bubble in history, heavily indebted local governments and SOEs, and geopolitical tensions, China struggled to regain the same rate of growth prior to the pandemic. But in retrospect, the end of the Chinese economic miracle in the Xi Jinping era was a foregone conclusion. The party's failure to implement more radical market-oriented reforms in the Hu Jintao era led to a gradual erosion of overall efficiency and diminished the country's growth prospects. As explained in chapters 3 and 4, stagnation was the logical outcome of a "trapped transition"—the progressive loss of the political incentives to pursue reform by a neo-authoritarian regime. When Xi Jinping succeeded in reviving China's dormant totalitarian institutions, the adoption of radical pro-market reforms to rejuvenate growth would be ideologically and politically impossible, thus spelling the end of the economic miracle.

2022年12月，中国刚刚解除新冠疫情封锁措施，经济便迅速恶化，这令中国领导人和外界观察人士都感到措手不及。历史上最大的房地产泡沫破裂、地方政府和国有企业负债累累以及地缘政治紧张局势，都给中国经济带来了沉重的负担，使其难以恢复到疫情前的增长速度。但事后看来，习近平时代中国经济奇迹的终结其实早已注定。胡锦涛时代，中共未能推行更加激进的市场化改革，导致整体效率逐渐下降，并削弱了国家的增长前景。正如本书第三章和第四章所述，经济停滞是“转型困境”的必然结果——即新威权政权逐渐丧失推行改革的政治动力。当习近平成功复兴中国沉寂已久的极权体制后，采取激进的亲市场改革来重振经济增长在意识形态和政治上都是不可能的，这标志着经济奇迹的终结。

Ideologically, Xi's brand of neo-Stalinist rule would further elevate the political supremacy of the party, resulting in the strengthening of the party-state's direct control of the economy and the extension of its hold on the private sector. Theoretically, a promising course of reform might exist on paper, as evidenced by sensible prescriptions well-known to Chinese leaders.1 However, such economic reforms would be impracticable without accompanying political reforms. By the time Xi ascended to the top, powerful interests benefiting from the systemic inefficiencies of China's partially reformed economy—such as families of senior officials and their cronies in the business world, local government officials, state-owned enterprises and, most important, the party itself—would resist these reforms that threatened their power and privileges. It is worth repeating that these political forces were themselves the inevitable consequences of the inherent limitations of Dengist neo-authoritarianism. With favorable one-off structural factors, economic development under one-party rule might score impressive early results but would eventually lose steam and stagnate, as happened in the Xi era.

从意识形态上看，习近平的新斯大林主义统治将进一步提升党的政治至高地位，从而加强党国对经济的直接控制，并扩大其对私营部门的控制。理论上，改革的前景或许在纸面上存在，中国领导人熟知的合理方案也印证了这一点。然而，若没有相应的政治改革，此类经济改革将难以实施。在习近平掌权之时，那些从中国部分改革后的经济体制弊端中获益的强大利益集团——例如高级官员的家族及其在商界的亲信、地方政府官员、国有企业，以及最重要的，党本身——将会抵制这些威胁到其权力和特权的改革。值得重申的是，这些政治力量本身就是邓小平新威权主义固有局限性的必然结果。在有利的一次性结构性因素的影响下，一党专政下的经济发展可能会在初期取得令人瞩目的成果，但最终会失去动力并停滞不前，就像习近平时代发生的那样。





The Economy Xi Inherited





习近平继承的经济


Growth started sputtering even before Xi assumed power in late 2012. Economic output recorded its last double-digit growth of 10.2 percent in 2010. In 2012 growth had slowed to 8.1 percent.2 To be sure, sustaining double-digit growth for an economy of $8.5 trillion in 2012 would be no easy feat. Reversion to the mean—a fall in growth rates that brings the expansion of output to the historical average—is the law of economics that applies to China in the same way as it does to all economies.3 However, China's apparent entry into a period of moderate growth, what its leaders preferred to call "the new normal," was accompanied by several economic abnormalities that compounded the challenges faced by the CCP in its attempts to sustain sufficient dynamism and turn China into a high-income economy.

早在习近平2012年底上台之前，经济增长就已经开始放缓。经济产出最后一次两位数增长是在2010年，当时增速为10.2%。2012年，增速已放缓至8.1%。2 诚然，对于2012年经济规模达8.5万亿美元的中国来说，维持两位数增长绝非易事。均值回归——即增长率下降，最终使产出扩张回归历史平均水平——是适用于中国和其他所有经济体的经济规律。3 然而，中国表面上进入了温和增长时期，其领导人更愿意称之为“新常态”，但与此同时，也出现了一些经济异常现象，这些现象加剧了中共在维持足够活力和将中国打造成为高收入经济体方面所面临的挑战。

Perhaps the most important economic anomaly—and a persistent constraint on the economy—was the structural imbalance that emerged in the post-Tiananmen period and remained uncorrected throughout the Hu Jintao era. Specifically, economic growth was excessively reliant on investment, a dependency that inevitably results in diminishing returns and overcapacity. If anything, this macroeconomic imbalance worsened under Hu. At the end of 2002, when Hu became party chief, investment accounted for about 38 percent of GDP. By 2012, when Xi succeeded Hu, investment had risen to 48 percent of GDP.4 Although Hu was able to muddle through despite the growing macroeconomic imbalance, the odds that Xi would be able to do so during the period of “the new normal” appeared to be far less favorable. He did not enjoy many of the advantages of the Hu regime, such as relatively low levels of debt, a massive expansion of exports due to China's WTO entry, and healthy demographics, just to mention a few.

或许最重要的经济异常现象——也是对经济发展持续制约的因素——是天安门事件后出现并在胡锦涛时代始终未得到纠正的结构性失衡。具体而言，经济增长过度依赖投资，这种依赖必然导致收益递减和产能过剩。胡锦涛执政期间，这种宏观经济失衡反而加剧。2002年底胡锦涛就任党总书记时，投资约占GDP的38%。到2012年习近平接替胡锦涛时，投资已升至GDP的48%。尽管胡锦涛能够勉强应对日益严重的宏观经济失衡，但习近平在“新常态”下能否做到这一点似乎远没有那么乐观。他没有享有胡锦涛执政时期的诸多优势，例如相对较低的债务水平、加入世贸组织后出口的大幅增长以及健康的人口结构等等。

In addition to the worsening macroeconomic imbalances, another serious and potentially perilous obstacle confronting Xi was the rapidly rising level of debt following China's credit-fueled stimulus in response to the 2008 global financial crisis. Total outstanding credit to the nonfinancial sector stood at 192 percent of GDP at the end of 2012. By comparison, when Hu became party chief a decade earlier, the amount of debt was 142 percent of GDP. Under Xi, this ratio would grow even higher, reaching 297 percent of GDP by the end of 2022. Debt incurred by the state (mostly local governments) was 35 percent of GDP at the end of 2012 and would rise to 78 percent of GDP by 2022. At the end of 2012, the leverage of companies, mostly SOEs, was at 128 percent of GDP; ten years later it reached 158 percent of GDP.5

除了日益恶化的宏观经济失衡之外，习近平面临的另一个严重且潜在的危险障碍是，在2008年全球金融危机后，中国采取信贷刺激措施，导致债务水平迅速攀升。截至2012年底，非金融部门未偿信贷总额占GDP的192%。相比之下，十年前胡锦涛担任中共中央总书记时，债务占GDP的142%。在习近平的领导下，这一比例将进一步攀升，到2022年底将达到GDP的297%。2012年底，国家（主要是地方政府）债务占GDP的35%，预计到2022年将升至GDP的78%。2012年底，企业（主要是国有企业）杠杆率为GDP的128%；十年后，这一比例达到GDP的158%。

The housing bubble, the third economic challenge confronting Xi, was at an early stage in 2012. Residential housing had boomed under Hu. In 2003 about 2.6 billion square meters of floor space were under construction; by 2012, the figure was roughly four times that amount, at 9.86 billion square meters.6

房地产泡沫是习近平面临的第三项经济挑战，2012年时它还处于早期阶段。胡锦涛执政时期，住宅建设蓬勃发展。2003年，在建住宅建筑面积约为26亿平方米；到2012年，这一数字约为当时的四倍，达到98.6亿平方米。

The last major danger lurking on the horizon was the fraying of relations with China's main trading partners in the West as a result of the sustained high trade deficits. America's bilateral merchandise trade deficit with China ballooned from $124 billion in 2003 to $315 billion in 2012.7 In the same period, the European Union's bilateral merchandise trade deficit with China nearly doubled, from $74 billion to $130 billion.8 Even though bilateral trade imbalances do not necessarily mean that one of the parties has been harmed, persistently high deficit levels are often seen as evidence of unfair trade practices perpetuated by the party recording a surplus. In the case of Sino-American trade, high imbalances in China's favor were exploited successfully by Donald Trump to win the support of blue-collar workers in the US rust belt, igniting a US-China trade war in 2018.9

最后一个潜伏在地平线上的主要危险是，由于持续的高额贸易逆差，中国与西方主要贸易伙伴的关系可能出现恶化。美国对华双边商品贸易逆差从2003年的1240亿美元飙升至2012年的3150亿美元。同期，欧盟对华双边商品贸易逆差几乎翻了一番，从740亿美元增至1300亿美元。尽管双边贸易失衡并不一定意味着一方遭受损失，但持续的高逆差水平通常被视为顺差方实施不公平贸易行为的证据。以中美贸易为例，唐纳德·特朗普成功利用了对中国有利的严重贸易失衡，赢得了美国“铁锈地带”蓝领工人的支持，从而在2018年引发了美中贸易战。

By 2012, most of the favorable structural and political factors that had earlier propelled double-digit growth had either dissipated or were weakening. The pool of cheap labor from the rural areas was declining, causing wages to rise rapidly. In the manufacturing sector, the average wage in 2012 was 2.3 times higher than it had been in 2002 in real terms.10 The population was also aging. About 94 million people (7.3 percent of the population) were aged 65 or older in 2002. Ten years later, the country had 127 million people aged 65 or older (9.4 percent of the population). In 2021 over 200 million, or 14.2 percent of the population, would be aged 65 or older.11 The lack of reform during the Hu period and the shift of resources to the real estate sector and to unproductive infrastructure due to the 2009 stimulus package caused a precipitous fall in productivity.12

到2012年，此前推动两位数增长的大部分有利结构性和政治性因素要么已经消失，要么正在减弱。来自农村地区的廉价劳动力减少，导致工资快速上涨。在制造业，2012年的平均工资实际水平是2002年的2.3倍。人口老龄化问题也日益严重。2002年，65岁及以上的人口约为9400万（占总人口的7.3%）。十年后，这一数字上升至1.27亿（占总人口的9.4%）。到2021年，超过2亿人口，即14.2%的人口，将年满65岁或以上。11 胡锦涛时期缺乏改革，以及2009年刺激计划导致资源向房地产行业和非生产性基础设施转移，造成生产率急剧下降。12

This summary of the Chinese economy in late 2012 reveals serious risks, such as macroeconomic imbalances, high and growing levels of debt, an incipient housing bubble, and deteriorating ties with its major trading partners. Although the Chinese government put a positive spin on the slowing growth, claiming that the country had entered "the new normal" phase of development, these risks threatened to make the new normal anything but normal. Economic stagnation could easily result from the chronic lack of consumption-driven demand and the overreliance on one sector, i.e., housing, as a driver of growth. The high debt levels could trigger a financial crisis, and the sustained trade imbalances could ignite trade wars. Indeed, these economic difficulties would culminate, during Xi's third term, in a prolonged economic slump marked by high youth unemployment, a colossal real estate collapse, and deflation.

这份对2012年末中国经济的总结揭示了诸多严重风险，例如宏观经济失衡、高企且不断增长的债务水平、萌芽中的房地产泡沫以及与主要贸易伙伴关系的恶化。尽管中国政府对经济增长放缓进行了积极解读，声称中国已进入“新常态”发展阶段，但这些风险却有可能使所谓的“新常态”远非正常。长期缺乏消费驱动型需求以及过度依赖单一行业（即房地产）作为增长引擎，极易导致经济停滞。高额债务可能引发金融危机，而持续的贸易失衡则可能引发贸易战。事实上，在习近平的第三个任期内，这些经济困境最终导致了长期的经济衰退，其特征是青年失业率居高不下、房地产市场崩盘以及通货紧缩。





Unkept Promises





未兑现的承诺


At the Third Plenum of the Eighteenth Central Committee in November 2013, Xi unveiled a sixty-point reform plan, apparently to establish his credentials as a reformer. Despite its title, "Decision of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China on Some Major Issues Concerning Comprehensively Deepening the Reform," Xi's blueprint is notable for its contradictions and incompatible objectives.13 Rhetorically, the decision seems to have made an ideological breakthrough by stating: "We must deepen economic system reform by centering on the decisive role of the market in allocating resources." Previously, the party had allowed the market to play only a role that was subordinate to that of the state. However, this ideological framing contradicts the decision's insistence that in China's economic system the state-owned sector is the main entity (zhuti), with economic actors of other ownership developing side by side. To underscore its determination to maintain the dominance of the state-owned sector, the decision states: "We must unwervingly consolidate and develop the public economy, persist in the dominant position of public ownership, give full play to the leading role of the state-owned sector, and continuously increase its vitality, controlling force and influence. We must unwaveringly encourage, support and guide the development of the nonpublic sector, and stimulate its dynamism and creativity." However convoluted, the ideological formulation in the decision leaves an unmistakable impression that the party was seeking to maintain an economic system based on state ownership, with nonstate economic entities playing a subordinate role.

2013年11月，在中共十八届三中全会上，习近平公布了一项六十点改革方案，显然是为了确立其改革者的形象。尽管该方案名为《中共中央关于全面深化改革若干重大问题的决定》，但习近平的方案却因其矛盾之处和目标上的冲突而引人注目。从修辞上看，该决定似乎在意识形态上取得了突破，指出：“我们必须以市场在资源配置中的决定性作用为中心，深化经济体制改革。”此前，中共一直允许市场发挥从属于国家的作用。然而，这种意识形态框架与该决定坚持认为国有企业是中国经济体制的主体（主力），其他所有制经济主体与之并存的观点相矛盾。为了强调其维护国有经济主导地位的决心，该决定指出：“我们必须坚定不移地巩固和发展公有经济，坚持公有制的主导地位，充分发挥国有经济的领导作用，不断增强国有经济的活力、控制力和影响力。我们必须坚定不移地鼓励、支持和引导非公有经济的发展，激发其活力和创造力。” 尽管措辞复杂，但该决定的意识形态表述无疑给人留下了深刻的印象，即党试图维持以国有制为基础的经济体制，非国有经济实体则处于从属地位。

Substantively, the decision consists of two separate packages of "reform." One package addresses the flaws in the economy (such as the state-owned enterprises, the fiscal system, the financial sector, and so forth) and the delivery of public services. The other package seeks institutional changes in state institutions (the military, the legal system, and the bureaucracy).

实质上，该决定包含两套独立的“改革”方案。一套方案着眼于经济（例如国有企业、财政体系、金融部门等）和公共服务供给方面的缺陷。另一套方案则寻求对国家机构（军队、司法系统和官僚机构）进行制度性改革。

At first glance, the proposed package of economic reforms seems more radical than any of the previous reforms announced by the party in the post-Tiananmen era. For example, it proposes land reform that will benefit farmers, a fiscal reform that will raise local revenues and increase the provision of social services, price reform that will liberalize energy, utility, telecom, and transportation markets, an opening up of the financial sector to private firms, and taking rapid steps in the direction of interest and currency liberalization. Unfortunately, few of these reforms were implemented in subsequent years. If anything, the party reversed course and, instead of allowing the market to play a "decisive role," brought back the state at the expense of the private sector.14

乍看之下，这套经济改革方案似乎比中共在后天安门时代宣布的任何改革都更为激进。例如，它提议进行有利于农民的土地改革，进行增加地方财政收入和扩大社会服务供给的财政改革，进行价格改革以开放能源、公用事业、电信和交通运输市场，向私营企业开放金融领域，并迅速推进利率和货币自由化。然而，不幸的是，这些改革措施在随后的几年里鲜有落实。不仅如此，中共还改变了方向，非但没有让市场发挥“决定性作用”，反而以牺牲私营部门为代价，重新赋予国家权力。

The other package seeks to strengthen the party and its control over the state. The most notable proposals were the establishment of the CCP National Security Commission, the restructuring of the military, and tighter social controls (cybersecurity, censorship, and neighborhood-level surveillance through "grid management"). Unlike the unfulfilled economic reform promises, these measures were fully implemented during Xi's first term.

另一项改革方案旨在加强党的权力和对国家的控制。其中最引人注目的提议包括成立中共国家安全委员会、改革军队以及加强社会管控（网络安全、审查制度以及通过“网格化管理”进行社区层面的监控）。与未能兑现的经济改革承诺不同，这些措施在习近平第一任期内得到了全面落实。

Xi abandoned his economic reform plan but adhered to his blueprint to strengthen the party-state for three probable reasons. The first is the fundamental incompatibility of a fully marketized economy with the supremacy of a Leninist regime, whereby any loss of control over economic activities carries an unacceptable risk of ceding political power to economic and social forces that might underwrite or become organized opposition. This is the same dilemma that had confronted Xi's predecessors. Like them, Xi simply could not square the circle and therefore had to forgo whatever ambitions he might have had to "comprehensively deepen" reform.

习近平放弃了经济改革计划，但坚持强化党国体制的蓝图，这很可能有三个原因。首先，完全市场化的经济与列宁主义政权的至高无上根本无法兼容，任何对经济活动的失控都可能导致政治权力拱手让给经济和社会力量，而这些力量可能成为反对派的幕后推手或组织起来。习近平的前任们也面临着同样的困境。和他们一样，习近平也无法兼顾两者，因此不得不放弃他原本可能怀有的“全面深化”改革的雄心壮志。

The second factor is the combination of practical difficulties and political resistance from actors and groups that had benefited from the status quo. Some reforms, such as financial sector reforms, currency liberalization, strengthening of the social safety net, and restructuring of central-local fiscal relations, would be complex and challenging in terms of technical knowledge, resource requirements, and political opposition. For example, expanding local fiscal revenue by levying a property tax would encounter strong resistance from urban residents.

第二个因素是实际操作上的困难以及既得利益者和既得利益群体的政治阻力。一些改革，例如金融部门改革、货币自由化、加强社会保障体系以及重组中央与地方财政关系，在技术知识、资源需求和政治阻力方面都十分复杂且具有挑战性。例如，通过征收房产税来扩大地方财政收入，就会遭到城市居民的强烈抵制。

The third explanation is that Xi, a hardcore Leninist, saw the task of shoring up the foundations of Leninist rule as far more important and urgent than injecting a new dose of dynamism into the economy. Politically, he would also benefit from measures to strengthen party control over the state and society because these steps would centralize his authority and grant him more power. Not surprisingly, the institutional changes proposed in the decision gave Xi more direct control over national security, cybersecurity, and any major policy changes after he assumed his new roles as head of the new commissions and the "small leading groups" overseeing these domains.

第三种解释是，作为一名坚定的列宁主义者，习近平认为巩固列宁主义统治的基础远比为经济注入新的活力更为重要和紧迫。在政治上，加强党对国家和社会的控制也将使他受益，因为这些措施将集中他的权力，赋予他更大的权力。不出所料，该决定中提出的制度改革赋予了习近平在担任新委员会和负责这些领域的“小领导小组”组长后，对国家安全、网络安全以及任何重大政策变革更大的直接控制权。





Supply-Side Reform





供给侧改革


After abandoning his own package of economic reforms unveiled in November 2013, Xi opted for a set of more targeted measures at the end of 2015. Titled "supply-side reform," this program aims to address four major flaws in the Chinese economy: excess capacity, excess inventory, high debt leverage, and shortfalls in indigenous high-tech products. Conceived by his chief economic advisor, Vice Premier Liu He, supply-side reform was launched on November 10, 2015, and billed as an effort to increase the efficiency of the economy.15 Even though Xi appears to have invested enormous political capital in this package, including inserting supply-side reform into the CCP charter in late 2017, the reforms are more tactical than structural and do not confront the most serious economic problem: the imbalance between investment and consumption. Excess capacity and high debt levels, however serious, are symptoms, not causes, of the structural flaws in an economy in which the state controls too much capital and invests it wastefully. Additionally, these reforms were implemented almost exclusively through administrative fiat, thus resulting in discrimination against the private sector.

在放弃了2013年11月公布的经济改革方案后，习近平于2015年底选择了一系列更有针对性的措施。这项名为“供给侧改革”的计划旨在解决中国经济的四大弊病：产能过剩、库存过剩、高负债率和自主高科技产品短缺。供给侧改革由其首席经济顾问、国务院副总理刘鹤提出，于2015年11月10日正式启动，并被标榜为提高经济效率的举措。尽管习近平似乎为这一方案投入了大量政治资本，包括在2017年底将供给侧改革写入中共党章，但这些改革更多的是策略性的而非结构性的，并没有触及最严重的经济问题：投资与消费之间的不平衡。产能过剩和高负债水平固然严重，但它们只是国家控制过多资本并进行浪费性投资等结构性缺陷的症状，而非根源。此外，这些改革几乎完全是通过行政命令实施的，从而导致对私营部门的歧视。

Excess industrial capacity has been a chronic problem in China due to overinvestment by local governments seeking to expand their economic fiefdom. Local officials have additional political incentives to create large industrial firms under their control because they can then generate economic activities that will help improve their chances for promotion. Consequently, as most local government officials play this game, their decisions unavoidably lead to the construction of factories that supply more than the market demands, and the brutal price competition in sectors with excess production capacity leads to financial losses. Unlike in market economies where there are hard budget constraints (firms do not have unlimited access to funds), loss-making firms owned by local governments in China, free from such constraints, can count on the local authorities to fund their losses and keep them afloat. In the post-Mao era, industries producing consumer goods have become liberalized and dominated by private and foreign firms. Excess capacity in these industries is usually eliminated by the exit of uncompetitive firms. But because SOEs maintain a significant presence, or even dominance, in heavy industries, such as steel, nonferrous metals, cement, chemicals, and coal, SOE access to subsidies and bailouts makes it difficult to eliminate excess capacity.16

在中国，由于地方政府为扩张经济版图而过度投资，工业产能过剩一直是一个长期存在的问题。地方官员还有额外的政治动机去创建由其控制的大型工业企业，因为这些企业能够创造经济活动，从而提升自身的晋升机会。因此，由于大多数地方官员都参与了这种博弈，他们的决策不可避免地导致工厂产能过剩，而产能过剩行业残酷的价格竞争最终导致企业亏损。与市场经济中存在严格的预算约束（企业无法无限获取资金）不同，在中国，由地方政府拥有的亏损企业不受此类约束，可以依靠地方政府为其亏损买单，维持运营。后毛泽东时代，消费品生产行业逐渐走向自由化，并被私营企业和外资企业所主导。这些行业的产能过剩通常会通过不具竞争力的企业退出市场而得到消除。但由于国有企业在钢铁、有色金属、水泥、化工和煤炭等重工业领域保持着相当大的份额，甚至占据主导地位，因此国有企业能够获得补贴和救助，这使得消除过剩产能变得困难。

Xi's supply-side reform package set ambitious targets for reducing excess capacity in heavy industry. In the case of crude steel, the State Council announced in February 2016 that it was seeking to cut capacity by 100-150 million tons within five years (8-12 percent of total capacity).17 Subsequently, the government painted a rosy picture of the progress of the reform, claiming it had removed more than 140 million tons of steel industry capacity between 2016 and September 2018.18 But data from the National Bureau of Statistics show more modest progress. China's production capacity for crude steel was cut from 1.126 billion tons in 2015 to 1.085 billion tons in 2020. This means that, within five years, Xi's reform succeeded in cutting only 41 million tons of crude steel, much less than the target set in early 2016. Like steel, cement production capacity was reduced only marginally as well, from 3.442 billion tons to 3.397 billion tons (i.e., only 45 million tons, or 1.3 percent), during the same period.19

习近平的供给侧改革方案为削减重工业过剩产能设定了雄心勃勃的目标。以粗钢为例，国务院于2016年2月宣布，计划在五年内削减1亿至1.5亿吨产能（占总产能的8%至12%）。随后，政府对改革进展描绘了一幅乐观的图景，声称在2016年至2018年9月期间，钢铁行业已削减超过1.4亿吨产能。但国家统计局的数据显示，实际进展更为有限。中国粗钢产能从2015年的11.26亿吨削减至2020年的10.85亿吨。这意味着，在五年内，习近平的改革仅成功削减了4100万吨粗钢产能，远低于2016年初设定的目标。与钢铁类似，同期水泥产能的削减幅度也较小，从34.42亿吨降至33.97亿吨（即仅削减4500万吨，降幅1.3%）。

After the 2008 global financial crisis, China relied heavily on an expansion of the supply of credit through the financial system to sustain growth. Consequently, the level of debt in the nonfinancial sector grew rapidly. However, during the initial three years of Xi's first term, the party made no effort to slow down the borrowing. The average annual increase in credit to the nonfinancial sector was nearly 16 percent between 2013 and 2015, two percentage points more than that in 2009-2012, during which time credit growth had skyrocketed. By the end of 2015, credit to the nonfinancial sector stood at 239 percent of GDP, creating a potential financial crisis that would be a serious threat to the Chinese economy.20 One unique feature of China's high levels of debt further exacerbated the risks of a financial crisis: heavy borrowing by local governments (mostly through local government financing vehicles).

2008年全球金融危机后，中国严重依赖金融体系信贷供应扩张来维持经济增长。因此，非金融部门的债务水平迅速增长。然而，在习近平第一任期的头三年，中共并未采取任何措施来放缓借贷。2013年至2015年，非金融部门信贷年均增长率接近16%，比2009年至2012年信贷增长迅猛的时期高出两个百分点。到2015年底，非金融部门信贷占GDP的比重达到239%，这造成了潜在的金融危机，对中国经济构成严重威胁。中国高额债务的一个独特之处在于：地方政府（主要通过地方政府融资机构）的大量借贷，这进一步加剧了金融危机的风险。

The primary reason for the buildup of local debt was the 1994 fiscal reform that recentralized revenue without shifting expenditures from the localities to Beijing. In 1993, the year before fiscal recentralization, local governments received nearly 80 percent of total revenue. But after the reform, their share fell to about 50 percent. The share of public expenditures borne by local governments remained the same, however, at around 80 percent of all public expenditures. This created a huge structural deficit for local governments, equivalent to 30 percent of total public revenue. The structural shortfall of revenue means that local governments lacked funds to invest in infrastructure and other big-ticket items. Aside from seeking funding from Beijing, an unreliable solution, local governments grew increasingly dependent on revenues from land sales and borrowing to fund local infrastructure and, in the less wealthy areas, even to cover routine operational expenses.21

地方债务累积的主要原因是1994年的财政改革，该改革虽然实现了财政收入的集中化，但并未将支出从地方转移到北京。在财政集中化前一年，即1993年，地方政府获得了近80%的财政收入。但改革后，这一比例下降到约50%。然而，地方政府承担的公共支出比例保持不变，约为公共支出总额的80%。这造成了地方政府巨大的结构性赤字，相当于公共收入总额的30%。财政收入的结构性短缺意味着地方政府缺乏资金投资基础设施和其他大型项目。除了向北京寻求资金（但这并非可靠的解决方案）之外，地方政府越来越依赖土地出售和借贷收入来资助地方基础设施建设，在欠发达地区，甚至连日常运营开支也难以维持。

The magnitude of land-related revenues for local public finance can be seen in the following numbers. In 2020 land-related taxes, 2 trillion yuan, contributed roughly 20 percent of total local tax revenue. But proceeds from land sales were a whopping 8.4 trillion yuan, equivalent to 80 percent of total local tax revenue. Typically, local governments use the land under their control as collateral to borrow from the banks. This creates a huge risk because the land pledged as collateral is illiquid, and its value is difficult to determine. As the true value of the land critically depends on the real estate market, a deterioration of that market will impair the value of the collateral and inflict large losses on banks.22

以下数据足以说明土地相关收入对地方公共财政的重要性。2020年，土地相关税收为2万亿元人民币，约占地方税收总额的20%。但土地出让收入高达8.4万亿元人民币，相当于地方税收总额的80%。通常情况下，地方政府会将管辖土地作为抵押品向银行贷款。这会带来巨大的风险，因为作为抵押的土地流动性差，且其价值难以确定。由于土地的真实价值高度依赖于房地产市场，因此房地产市场的恶化将损害抵押品的价值，并给银行造成巨额损失。

As discussed earlier, local governments did not begin their borrowing binge until the Hu administration launched its credit-fueled stimulus package in 2008-2009. In subsequent years, the amount of debt owed by local governments exploded. Official data on local debt authorized by the central government report 15.4 trillion yuan at the end of 2014. However, local governments kept far more debt off the books. Estimates by economists suggest that the amount of off-the-books debt borrowed by local governments could have been 200-250 percent of the amount on the books. What this implies is that at the end of 2014, real local debt might have been 45-53 trillion yuan, or 70-82 percent of GDP. The deleveraging campaign does not appear to have lowered the leverage, as local governments reported total debt of 18.4 trillion yuan on their books at the end of 2018. Moreover, in subsequent years, local debt continued to grow. At the end of 2021, the officially declared amount of local debt was 30 trillion yuan, implying that real local debt might have been as high as 90-105 trillion yuan, or 80-93 percent of GDP.23

如前所述，地方政府的借贷狂潮始于胡锦涛政府在2008-2009年推出信贷驱动型刺激计划之后。此后几年，地方政府的债务规模呈爆炸式增长。官方数据显示，截至2014年底，中央批准的地方债务总额为15.4万亿元人民币。然而，地方政府账外债务远超账面数字。经济学家估计，地方政府账外借款额可能高达账面债务的200%-250%。这意味着，截至2014年底，地方实际债务可能达到45万亿至53万亿元人民币，占GDP的70%-82%。去杠杆化运动似乎并未降低杠杆率，截至2018年底，地方政府账面债务总额仍高达18.4万亿元人民币。此外，此后几年，地方债务持续增长。截至2021年底，官方公布的地方债务总额为30万亿元人民币，这意味着实际地方债务可能高达90万亿至105万亿元人民币，占GDP的80%至93%。

Of all the outstanding nonfinancial sector debt at the end of 2015, corporations, both state-owned and private, accounted for roughly two-thirds (about 108 trillion yuan), according to the Chinese central bank. Of this amount, roughly 40 percent was borrowed by local-government-owned SOEs (including many local government financing vehicles) that were typically smaller, less profitable, and more leveraged. Loans extended to SOEs in general, and to local SOEs in particular, are far riskier because these firms are less profitable than private firms. Perversely, due to their political influence and privileged positions in the economy, they also have greater access to credit, thus enabling them to borrow more.24

据中国央行统计，截至2015年底，所有未偿非金融部门债务中，国有和私营企业约占三分之二（约108万亿元人民币）。其中，约40%的债务由地方政府所有的国有企业（包括许多地方政府融资机构）借入，这些企业通常规模较小、盈利能力较低、杠杆率较高。由于国有企业的盈利能力低于私营企业，因此向国有企业（尤其是地方国有企业）提供的贷款风险更高。然而，由于其政治影响力和在经济中的特殊地位，这些企业也更容易获得信贷，从而能够借入更多资金。

Like other so-called reforms during the Xi era, deleveraging—reducing the debt-to-asset ratios—was implemented by administrative fiat. Banks were ordered to call in loans regardless of their credit risks. Because private firms with weak political connections could not shield themselves from this campaign, the main burdens fell on the private sector. When their lenders demanded early payment, many private firms that had pledged their assets as collateral were forced either to sell (mostly to SOEs) or to declare bankruptcy.25 Deleveraging also raised the borrowing costs for private firms due to the perception that they carried heightened credit risks.26 One piece of evidence suggesting that the private sector bore the brunt of the deleveraging campaign is that the outstanding amount of debt borrowed by nonfinancial SOEs actually rose by 10 trillion yuan in the first two years after the launch of the deleveraging campaign in 2016.27

与习近平时代其他所谓的改革一样，去杠杆化——降低资产负债率——是通过行政命令实施的。银行被要求催收贷款，无论其信用风险如何。由于政治关系薄弱的民营企业无法免受这场运动的影响，主要负担落在了私营部门身上。当贷款方要求提前还款时，许多以资产作抵押的民营企业被迫出售资产（大多卖给了国有企业）或宣布破产。去杠杆化也提高了民营企业的借贷成本，因为人们普遍认为它们的信用风险更高。一个证据表明，私营部门承受了去杠杆化运动的大部分冲击：2016年去杠杆化运动启动后的头两年，非金融国有企业的未偿债务总额实际上增加了10万亿元人民币。

The party abruptly halted the deleveraging campaign in mid-2018 after the start of the US-China trade war. Chinese leaders apparently worried that they could not risk slower growth in the middle of the worst trade conflict in the post-Cold War era. The phrase "deleveraging" suddenly disappeared from official rhetoric and was soon replaced by a new phrase—"stabilizing leverage."28

2018年中美贸易战爆发后，中共突然停止了去杠杆化运动。显然，中国领导人担心，在冷战后最严重的贸易冲突中，经济增长放缓的风险太大。“去杠杆化”一词突然从官方话语中消失，很快被“稳定杠杆”这一新词所取代。

Based on data from the Bank of International Settlements, China's debt level was rising, instead of declining, during the deleveraging campaign. At the end of 2015, credit to the nonfinancial sector stood at 239 percent of GDP. By the time Xi ended the campaign in July 2018, it was 260 percent of GDP. If we judge the success of deleveraging by the amount of the reduction in the growth of debt, then the deleveraging campaign can be considered a modest success because the debt grew at an annual rate of 8.4 percentage points of GDP during this period, compared with 15.6 percent during 2013-2015. In the four years after the official end of the deleveraging campaign, debt growth averaged 8.5 percentage points of GDP each year.29 The singular achievement of deleveraging was a reduction in the growth of debt, not a reduction in the leverage itself. In spite of the slower growth of debt, however, China's high leverage continued to threaten the stability of its financial sector and deprive its leaders of policy options when the economy was confronted with prospects of stagnant growth and deflation, as was the case in mid-2023.

根据国际清算银行的数据，在去杠杆化运动期间，中国的债务水平不降反升。2015年底，非金融部门信贷占GDP的239%。到2018年7月习近平结束去杠杆化运动时，这一比例已达260%。如果我们以债务增长速度的下降幅度来衡量去杠杆化的成功，那么去杠杆化运动只能算作一次小成功，因为在此期间，债务年均增长率仅为GDP的8.4个百分点，而2013-2015年期间的这一数字为15.6%。在去杠杆化运动正式结束后的四年里，债务年均增长率为GDP的8.5个百分点。去杠杆化的唯一成果是降低了债务增长速度，而非降低了杠杆率本身。尽管债务增长速度放缓，但中国的高杠杆率仍然威胁着其金融部门的稳定，并在经济面临增长停滞和通货紧缩的前景时（例如 2023 年年中），剥夺了其领导人的政策选择权。





The Housing Bubble





房地产泡沫


In 2003 the government designated the real estate sector as a "pillar industry." In the following decade, the explosive expansion of the sector turned it into one of the main drivers of growth. In 2003 investment in the sector was only 1 trillion yuan. By 2012, the end of the Hu period, investment in the sector reached 7.18 trillion yuan.30 During the Xi period, the growth of investment in the sector cooled off. In absolute terms, however, massive resources were nevertheless misallocated into the overbuilt sector. Cumulatively, between 2013 and 2023, real estate investment totaled 120 trillion yuan, almost equal to China's GDP in 2023 (table 7.1).

2003年，政府将房地产行业列为“支柱产业”。在接下来的十年里，该行业经历了爆炸式增长，成为经济增长的主要动力之一。2003年，房地产行业投资额仅为1万亿元人民币。到2012年胡锦涛时代末期，该行业投资额已达7.18万亿元人民币。习近平时代，该行业投资增速放缓。然而，从绝对值来看，大量资源仍然被错误地配置到过度建设的房地产领域。2013年至2023年，房地产投资累计达120万亿元人民币，几乎相当于2023年中国的GDP（表7.1）。

TABLE 7.1. Investment in Real Estate, 2013-2023

表7.1. 2013-2023年房地产投资

Source: ZGTJNJ 2024, https://www.stats.gov.cn/sj/ndsj/.

来源：ZGTJNJ 2024，https://www.stats.gov.cn/sj/ndsj/。





To make things worse, the booming sector led to a rapid increase in housing prices, prompting the government to take repeated measures to cool housing. Starting in 2005, the State Council issued a series of documents to control excess investment in the real estate sector and to restrict purchases so to dampen speculative behavior. These measures, however, had at best a marginal impact on containing the surging housing prices, especially in the largest and most prosperous cities, such as Shanghai, Beijing, and Shenzhen.31

更糟糕的是，房地产行业的蓬勃发展导致房价迅速上涨，促使政府多次采取措施为房地产市场降温。自2005年起，国务院发布了一系列文件，旨在控制房地产行业的过度投资，限制购房，以抑制投机行为。然而，这些措施对遏制房价飙升的效果充其量也只是微乎其微，尤其是在上海、北京和深圳等规模最大、最繁荣的城市。

Several factors made it difficult for the government to prevent a housing bubble. First, at the national level, the housing sector contributed close to one-third of annual GDP growth by the end of the 2010s.32 Thus a drastic slowdown in the housing sector would hurt growth. Second, local governments depended on the housing sector for revenue. In addition to the taxes collected from real estate transactions, the income realized through the sale of land to developers and the credit obtained from banks using land as collateral constituted the principal sources of nontax revenue for local governments.

多种因素使得政府难以阻止房地产泡沫的出现。首先，在国家层面，到2010年代末，住房部门对年度GDP增长的贡献接近三分之一。因此，住房部门的急剧放缓将损害经济增长。其次，地方政府依赖住房部门的收入。除了房地产交易征收的税款外，通过向开发商出售土地获得的收入以及以土地为抵押从银行获得的信贷，构成了地方政府非税收入的主要来源。

Therefore, the local governments had incentives to sustain the real estate boom as long as possible. Third, housing—in particular, housing in large cities—was perhaps the only profitable asset for Chinese savers. Capital controls made it impossible to invest abroad, while the volatile domestic stock market, dominated by the inefficient SOEs, delivered poor results. As a result, the overlapping interests of a growth-obsessed central government, revenue-hungry local authorities, aggressive real estate developers, and residents seeking better housing or higher investment returns fueled the housing bubble and kept it from crashing.33

因此，地方政府有动机尽可能长时间地维持房地产繁荣。第三，住房——尤其是大城市的住房——或许是当时中国储户唯一有利可图的资产。资本管制使得海外投资变得不可能，而受低效国有企业主导、波动剧烈的国内股市表现不佳。结果，一心追求经济增长的中央政府、渴望财政收入的地方政府、积极进取的房地产开发商以及寻求更好住房或更高投资回报的居民之间利益的交织，助长了房地产泡沫，并使其免于破裂。

In December 2016 Xi Jinping personally ordered the first serious effort to cool the housing sector when he declared that "housing is for living, not for speculation." This mantra instantly prompted the government to adopt tough regulations. In addition to limiting the number of housing units individuals or families could purchase, the crackdown included prohibitions against selling new units within two years after the initial purchase, higher interest rates on mortgages, a ban on the issuance of mortgages to purchasers who already owned two units, and an increase in the supply of low-cost rental housing.34

2016年12月，习近平亲自下令，首次认真采取措施给房地产市场降温，他提出“住房是用来居住的，不是用来炒房的”。这一口号立即促使政府出台了一系列严格的监管措施。除了限制个人或家庭购房数量外，整顿措施还包括禁止在首次购房后两年内出售新房、提高抵押贷款利率、禁止向已拥有两套房产的购房者发放抵押贷款，以及增加低价租赁住房的供应。

Despite implementation of these measures, the bubble in the housing sector grew bigger, albeit at a slower pace. The amount of investment in the real estate sector rose on average 8.4 percent per year between 2017 and 2019, 50 percent more than the annual average growth of 5.7 percent between 2014 and 2016, but nearly a third of the annual average increase in growth of 22.6 percent recorded between 2009 and 2013.35 Instead of declining, the average price per square meter rose, from slightly under 7,500 yuan to 10,000 yuan, from 2016 to 2020.36

尽管采取了这些措施，房地产泡沫仍然扩大，尽管增速放缓。2017年至2019年间，房地产投资额年均增长8.4%，比2014年至2016年间5.7%的年均增速高出50%，但仅为2009年至2013年间22.6%年均增速的三分之一左右。此外，平均每平方米价格不降反升，从2016年的略低于7500元人民币涨至2020年的10000元人民币。

The ineffectiveness of the policies implemented after Xi's edict forced the government to double down in 2020, despite the economic downturn attributed to the Covid-19 pandemic. In August the government rolled out an unprecedented regulation, popularly known as the "three red lines," to force developers to reduce their leverage. Specifically, developers could increase their debt level by 15 percent if they met three criteria: a liability-to-asset ratio of less than 70 percent (excluding prepayments made by purchasers for unfinished housing units), net debt below total equity, and cash on hand equal to or exceeding 100 percent of short-term debt. If they met only two of the three criteria, they could increase their leverage by 10 percent. If they met only one of the three, they could raise their debt level by 5 percent. If they failed on all three measures, they could not raise their debt level. The government likely intended for this seemingly nuanced policy to achieve a soft landing in the housing bubble. However, the government did not anticipate the risks of contagion precipitated by the loss of access to credit by even a small number of highly indebted real estate developers. At the time of the policy announcement, about one-quarter of China's two hundred largest real estate firms met none of the three criteria and were facing the prospect of losing access to credit. Consequently, implementation of the policy precipitated a disorderly unwinding of China's real estate bubble that could not have been the original intention of policymakers.37

尽管新冠疫情导致经济下滑，但习近平指示后实施的政策效果不佳，迫使政府在2020年加大力度。8月，政府推出了一项前所未有的规定，即俗称的“三条红线”，旨在强制开发商降低杠杆率。具体而言，如果开发商满足以下三个条件，则可以提高15%的负债水平：负债资产比率低于70%（不包括购房者预付的未完工房屋款项）、净负债低于总权益、以及现金储备等于或超过短期债务的100%。如果仅满足三个条件中的两个，则可以提高10%的杠杆率。如果仅满足其中一个，则可以提高5%的杠杆率。如果三个条件均不满足，则无法提高杠杆率。政府很可能希望通过这项看似微妙的政策，实现房地产泡沫的软着陆。然而，政府并未预料到，即使只有少数负债累累的房地产开发商失去信贷渠道，也会引发连锁反应的风险。政策出台之时，中国两百家最大的房地产企业中，约有四分之一不符合上述三项标准中的任何一项，面临失去信贷渠道的风险。因此，该政策的实施导致了中国房地产泡沫的无序破裂，这显然并非政策制定者的初衷。

Unlike previous attempts, the "three red lines" perhaps worked too well, judging by the implosion of the real estate sector that was to follow. In 2021 investment in the sector grew only 4.3 percent, and sales measured in floor space rose only 1.9 percent. Ominously, the amount of land purchased by developers for potential projects, a leading indicator, fell 15.5 percent.38 For the heavily indebted real estate developers, enforcement of the three red lines sounded a death knell. Evergrande, one of China's largest real estate developers that met none of the three criteria, was immediately pushed to the brink of insolvency. Saddled with nearly two trillion yuan of debt, Evergrande could not raise new debt to pay its bills. By August 2023, it filed for bankruptcy and its founder was placed under criminal investigation.39 The unavoidable contagion triggered by Evergrande's default quickly plunged other large and equally indebted real estate developers into a liquidity crisis after they lost access to new financing.

与以往的尝试不同，从随后房地产行业的崩盘来看，“三条红线”或许效果过头了。2021年，该行业的投资仅增长4.3%，以建筑面积衡量的销售额仅增长1.9%。更令人担忧的是，作为领先指标的开发商为潜在项目购置的土地数量下降了15.5%。对于负债累累的房地产开发商而言，“三条红线”的实施无异于敲响了丧钟。恒大是中国最大的房地产开发商之一，由于不符合这三条标准中的任何一条，立即被推到了破产的边缘。背负着近两万亿元人民币债务的恒大，根本无力筹集新的资金来偿还债务。到 2023 年 8 月，恒大申请破产，其创始人被刑事调查。恒大违约引发的不可避免的连锁反应，迅速使其他规模庞大且负债累累的房地产开发商陷入流动性危机，因为它们失去了获得新融资的渠道。

The deflation of the real estate bubble accelerated in 2022 when investment in the sector fell 10 percent from the previous year. Sales measured by transactions dropped 27 percent.40 In 2023 the real estate sector was in a meltdown. By September, two-thirds of the top fifty private real estate firms were in default of their dollar-denominated bonds.41 Housing prices in major cities recorded a consistent decline despite the government's efforts to limit the fall in sale prices and the use of massaged data to conceal the extent of the decline in prices.42 Compared with 2022, sales of homes by floor space fell 7.5 percent in the first nine months of 2023, while investment in the real estate sector declined by 9.5 percent for the whole year.43

2022年，房地产泡沫的破裂加速，该行业的投资额较上年下降10%，交易量下降27%。2023年，房地产行业陷入崩溃。到9月份，排名前50位的私营房地产公司中，有三分之二的美元债券违约。尽管政府努力限制房价下跌，并利用数据操纵掩盖价格下跌的程度，但主要城市的房价仍持续下降。与2022年相比，2023年前九个月，按建筑面积计算的房屋销售量下降了7.5%，而全年房地产行业的投资额下降了9.5%。

The crash of the real estate sector in 2023-2024 dragged down the economy and forced the government to relax enforcement of the three red lines. To resuscitate the real estate sector, local governments scrapped the restrictions on purchasing homes, and banking regulators lowered the amount of down payment required to obtain mortgages.44 However, the crisis in the real estate sector was so vast and deep that these modest measures did not make much of a difference. The housing sector is expected to be weak and to depress growth for years to come.45

2023-2024年房地产市场的崩盘拖累了整体经济，迫使政府放松了“三红线”的执行力度。为了重振房地产市场，地方政府取消了购房限制，银行监管机构也降低了抵押贷款的首付比例。然而，房地产市场的危机规模巨大且影响深远，这些小幅措施收效甚微。预计未来几年住房市场将持续疲软，并抑制经济增长。





The US-China Trade War





美中贸易战


Sino-American trade tensions were simmering even before the trade war launched by Donald Trump in 2018. After China joined the WTO in December 2001, bilateral merchandise trade boomed. In 2001 the United States exported $19 billion worth of goods to China and imported $102 billion. By the time Trump won his surprise victory in 2016, the United States was exporting $116 billion to China and importing $462 billion from China.46 During this period, a persistent high trade deficit, restricted market access in China, and violations of the intellectual property rights of US firms stoked tensions between Washington and Beijing. However, the high-level exchanges between China and the United States on trade yielded no meaningful outcomes. America's trade deficit with China remained stubbornly high, while charges of theft of intellectual property and of China's failure to honor its WTO commitments grew louder.

中美贸易紧张局势早在2018年唐纳德·特朗普发起贸易战之前就已暗流涌动。自中国于2001年12月加入世贸组织以来，双边商品贸易蓬勃发展。2001年，美国对华出口额为190亿美元，进口额为1020亿美元。到2016年特朗普意外胜选时，美国对华出口额已达1160亿美元，从中国进口额高达4620亿美元。在此期间，持续高企的贸易逆差、中国市场准入受限以及美国企业知识产权遭到侵犯等问题，加剧了华盛顿和北京之间的紧张关系。然而，中美之间就贸易问题进行的高层磋商并未取得任何实质性成果。美国对华贸易逆差居高不下，而美国对中国窃取知识产权和违反世贸组织承诺的指责也愈演愈烈。

Disappointment over China's lack of action to address these concerns eroded corporate America's goodwill. Even more important, the combination of technological change and globalization resulted in the loss of millions of blue-collar manufacturing jobs in America's politically crucial rust belt, creating an opening for a populist like Trump to exploit resentment among these victims of globalization. During his presidential bid in 2016, Trump adroitly seized the trade issue, accusing China of "raping" America and engaging in the "greatest theft in the history of the world."47

由于中国未能采取行动解决这些问题，美国企业界的失望情绪日益加剧，其好感度也随之下降。更重要的是，技术变革和全球化的结合导致美国政治重镇“铁锈地带”数百万蓝领制造业岗位流失，这为像特朗普这样的民粹主义者提供了可乘之机，使其得以利用这些全球化受害者的不满情绪。在2016年总统竞选期间，特朗普巧妙地抓住了贸易问题，指责中国“掠夺”美国，并犯下了“世界历史上最大的盗窃罪”。

After he entered the White House, Trump appointed a trade hawk, Robert Lighthizer, as his trade representative. In August 2017 Lighthizer initiated an investigation into China's violations of America's intellectual property rights. In early April of the following year, he produced a report finding China in violation of intellectual property rights. As a penalty, the report proposed levying 25 percent additional tariffs on $50 billion of Chinese goods imported into the United States. China reacted by threatening to impose 25 percent tariffs on $50 billion of American goods exported to China. Thus began the largest trade war in post-World War II history to that time.

特朗普入主白宫后，任命贸易鹰派人物罗伯特·莱特希泽担任贸易代表。2017年8月，莱特希泽启动了对中国侵犯美国知识产权的调查。次年4月初，他发布报告，认定中国侵犯了美国的知识产权。作为惩罚措施，该报告提议对价值500亿美元的中国输美商品加征25%的关税。中国随即威胁对价值500亿美元的美国输华商品加征25%的关税。由此，二战后规模最大的贸易战拉开了序幕。

As Xi responded to Trump's trade war with retaliatory tariffs on American goods, the United States and China engaged in a series of negotiations in an attempt to resolve their disputes, albeit without much success. A ray of hope for an ending to the trade war emerged in early 2019 when it appeared that China might accept an American proposal that would force major changes in its trading practices. But the CCP Politburo Standing Committee rejected the proposal, a development that prompted an infuriated Trump to escalate the trade war.48 Subsequently, Trump extended tariffs of between 10 and 25 percent on nearly all Chinese imports to the United States. But in January 2020 the two countries signed the so-called Phase One Deal that withheld planned further tariff increases on $160 billion worth of Chinese imports, cut tariffs from 15 to 7.5 percent on $120 billion of Chinese goods, but maintained the 25 percent tariff on $250 billion worth of Chinese imports. In return, China pledged to increase its purchases of American exports and services by at least $200 billion over the next two years. Although Trump touted the deal as a “win,” China did not buy the promised extra American goods and services in 2020 and 2021.49

在习近平以对美国商品加征报复性关税回应特朗普的贸易战后，中美两国展开了一系列谈判，试图解决争端，但收效甚微。2019年初，贸易战似乎出现了一线曙光：中国似乎可能接受美国的一项提议，该提议将迫使中国对其贸易做法进行重大调整。然而，中共中央政治局常委会否决了这项提议，这激怒了特朗普，导致贸易战升级。随后，特朗普对几乎所有中国输美商品加征了10%至25%的关税。但在2020年1月，两国签署了所谓的“第一阶段协议”，该协议暂停了对价值1600亿美元的中国进口商品进一步加征关税的计划，并将价值1200亿美元的中国商品的关税从15%降至7.5%，但维持了对价值2500亿美元的中国进口商品25%的关税。作为交换，中国承诺在未来两年内至少增加2000亿美元的美国出口商品和服务采购。尽管特朗普称该协议为“胜利”，但中国在2020年和2021年并未购买承诺的额外美国商品和服务。

By the time Trump left office in January 2021, the trade war had placed additional cumulative tariffs on $550 billion of Chinese imports, while China had retaliated with cumulative punitive tariffs on $185 billion worth of American products. After Joe Biden entered the White House, he kept Trump's tariffs in place, both because reducing or removing them would cost him dearly in a country in which protrade policies were no longer popular and because the ongoing deterioration in US-China relations made such a concession difficult.50

到特朗普于2021年1月卸任时，贸易战已对价值5500亿美元的中国进口商品加征了累计关税，而中国也对价值1850亿美元的美国商品加征了累计惩罚性关税作为报复。乔·拜登入主白宫后，维持了特朗普的关税政策，原因有二：一是在美国，减少或取消这些关税会让他付出沉重代价，因为美国的贸易友好政策已不再受欢迎；二是美中关系的持续恶化使得做出这样的让步变得困难重重。

Despite the ferocity of the trade war, its immediate economic impact was modest. China's GDP growth was 7.3 percent in 2017; it fell to 6.4 percent in 2018 and to 6.1 percent in 2019.51 US GDP growth rose from 2.2 in 2017 to 2.9 percent in 2018, but it fell to 2.2 percent in 2019.52 Most of the costs of the trade war—higher prices of China-made consumer goods due to the additional tariffs—were borne by American consumers.53

尽管贸易战激烈，但其直接的经济影响并不显著。2017年中国GDP增长率为7.3%，2018年降至6.4%，2019年进一步降至6.1%。美国GDP增长率从2017年的2.2%上升至2018年的2.9%，但2019年降至2.2%。贸易战的大部分成本——由于加征关税导致中国制造的消费品价格上涨——最终由美国消费者承担。

Judging by trade and investment flows, the trade war appears to have had only a minor impact on China. To be sure, China's exports to the United States in 2018 and 2019 fell significantly as the result of higher tariffs (table 7.2). The Covid-19 pandemic, which caused disruptions, further depressed Chinese exports to the United States in 2020. But in 2021 and 2022, Chinese exports to the United States recovered to the level prior to the trade war. The effects of "decoupling" became more pronounced starting in 2023, when Chinese exports to the United States fell to $427 billion, a decline of 20 percent from 2022.

从贸易和投资流动来看，贸易战对中国的影响似乎并不显著。诚然，由于关税上调，中国2018年和2019年对美出口大幅下降（见表7.2）。新冠疫情造成的经济中断进一步抑制了2020年中国对美出口。但到了2021年和2022年，中国对美出口已恢复到贸易战前的水平。“脱钩”的影响从2023年开始变得更加明显，当年中国对美出口降至4270亿美元，较2022年下降了20%。

TABLE 7.2. Trade in Goods with China (in billion USD)

表7.2. 与中国的货物贸易额（单位：十亿美元）

Source: US Census Bureau, https://www.census.gov/foreign-trade/balance/c5700.html.

来源：美国人口普查局，https://www.census.gov/foreign-trade/balance/c5700.html。



TABLE 7.3. Chinese Foreign Trade in Goods (in trillion USD)

表7.3. 中国货物贸易额（万亿美元）

Sources: ZGTJNJ 2022, https://www.stats.gov.cn/sj/ndsj/2022/indexch.htm; ZGTJNJ 2024, https://www.stats.gov.cn/sj/ndsj/2024/indexch.htm.

资料来源：2022年国家统计局，https://www.stats.gov.cn/sj/ndsj/2022/indexch.htm；2024年国家统计局，https://www.stats.gov.cn/sj/ndsj/2024/indexch.htm。



China's overall foreign trade was not initially affected by the trade war. Exports grew moderately between 2018 and 2020 and exploded between 2021 and 2022, likely reflecting China's central role in the global supply chains. Overall trade in 2023 held steady if measured in RMB but declined 5 percent in dollar terms, reflecting the depreciation of the Chinese currency (table 7.3)

中国整体对外贸易最初并未受到贸易战的影响。2018年至2020年间，出口温和增长，2021年至2022年间则出现爆发式增长，这可能反映了中国在全球供应链中的核心地位。2023年，以人民币计价的整体贸易额保持稳定，但以美元计价则下降了5%，这反映了人民币贬值（表7.3）。

In the immediate aftermath, foreign direct investment in China was more negatively affected by the trade war. In 2017 China recorded $181 billion in FDI. This amount fell to $135 billion in 2018 and $138 billion in 2019. It recovered close to the pre-trade-war level in 2021 ($173 billion) and 2022 ($189 billion).54

贸易战爆发后，对华外国直接投资的负面影响尤为显著。2017年，中国吸引外国直接投资1810亿美元。2018年和2019年，这一数字分别下降至1350亿美元和1380亿美元。2021年和2022年，中国外国直接投资逐渐恢复至接近贸易战前的水平，分别为1730亿美元和1890亿美元。

Despite the modest negative impact of the trade war on the Chinese economy in the short term, the US-China trade war marked the beginning of a "decoupling" of the Chinese economy from that of the United States and, to a lesser extent, from the economies of America's allies. On its own, the trade war raised the costs of Chinese goods in the United States, thus incentivizing manufacturers to relocate their manufacturing facilities to other countries, particularly to facilities in Southeast Asia, to avoid the additional tariffs. However, the trade war was not the sole trigger of the decoupling between the two economies. The outbreak of the Covid-19 pandemic in 2020 added another reason for the West to reduce its reliance on China. The pandemic inflicted massive disruptions on the global supply chains concentrated in China.55 For companies accustomed to counting on dependable deliveries from China, the disruptions caused by the lockdowns threatened normal operations.

尽管贸易战短期内对中国经济的负面影响不大，但中美贸易战标志着中国经济与美国经济（以及在较小程度上与美国盟友经济）“脱钩”的开始。贸易战本身推高了中国商品在美国的成本，从而促使制造商将生产设施转移到其他国家，特别是东南亚地区，以规避额外的关税。然而，贸易战并非两国经济脱钩的唯一导火索。2020年新冠疫情的爆发，为西方减少对中国的依赖增添了又一个理由。疫情对集中在中国的全球供应链造成了巨大冲击。对于那些习惯于依赖中国可靠供货的企业而言，封锁措施造成的干扰威胁到了其正常的运营。

Russia's invasion of Ukraine in February 2022 probably provided the most powerful incentive for Western manufacturers to accelerate relocation of their supply chains from China. After the war began, the West imposed unprecedented economic sanctions on Russia, freezing its assets and choking its access to Western imports and financial systems. In retaliation, Russia seized the assets of Western companies in Russia. The geopolitical risks of doing business with China rose exponentially overnight, mainly because of the prospect of a war between mainland China and Taiwan, which Beijing considers a breakaway province (in 1949, the defeated Chinese Nationalists withdrew to Taiwan, then part of China). A war across the Taiwan Strait would likely be far more economically devastating if the United States were to intervene to defend Taiwan. As China is the world's largest manufacturing economy and is far more integrated with the global economy than is Russia, fears of a catastrophic war involving mainland China, Taiwan, and potentially the United States immediately became an irresistible motivator for companies to move out of China or to source supplies from other countries.

2022年2月俄罗斯入侵乌克兰，或许是促使西方制造商加速将供应链从中国转移的最有力动力。战争爆发后，西方对俄罗斯实施了前所未有的经济制裁，冻结其资产，并切断其获取西方进口商品和金融体系的渠道。作为报复，俄罗斯查封了西方公司在俄罗斯的资产。与中国开展业务的地缘政治风险一夜之间呈指数级增长，这主要是因为中国大陆与台湾之间爆发战争的可能性。北京将台湾视为其分离省份（1949年，战败的国民党军队退守台湾，当时台湾是中国的一部分）。如果美国介入保卫台湾，台海战争造成的经济损失可能会更大。由于中国是世界最大的制造业经济体，并且与全球经济的融合程度远高于俄罗斯，因此，对中国大陆、台湾乃至美国之间可能爆发的灾难性战争的担忧，立即成为企业迁出中国或从其他国家采购原材料的强大动力。

To make matters worse, US-China relations continued to spiral downward after Joe Biden entered the White House. Even though on the surface Biden's strategy of containment did not advocate full-fledged economic decoupling, in practice the widespread perception in the business community that geopolitical tensions between the two countries were here to stay and could escalate out of control led to a repricing of the risks of doing business with or in China. Relations between Beijing and Brussels also fell victim to Russia's war against Ukraine. The Chinese-EU relationship had faced severe strains due to clashes over trade and human rights even before the war. Nevertheless, in the realm of security, China was eager to ensure the strategic neutrality of the EU in the Sino-American rivalry, and the EU was initially reluctant to take sides.

更糟糕的是，拜登入主白宫后，美中关系持续恶化。尽管拜登的遏制战略表面上并未主张彻底的经济脱钩，但实际上，商界普遍认为两国之间的地缘政治紧张局势将长期存在并可能失控升级，这导致企业重新评估了与中国开展业务或在华开展业务的风险。北京与布鲁塞尔的关系也因俄罗斯入侵乌克兰而受到影响。早在战争爆发前，中欧关系就因贸易和人权问题上的冲突而面临严峻考验。然而，在安全领域，中国渴望确保欧盟在中美竞争中保持战略中立，而欧盟最初也不愿选边站队。

When Vladimir Putin ordered the invasion of Ukraine, less than three weeks after he signed a joint declaration with Xi announcing a “no-limit friendship,” the EU’s relationship with China took a fateful turn. The largest and most violent war in Europe since World War II rendered the EU’s efforts to maintain strategic neutrality in the Sino-American rivalry untenable. In the meantime, Washington’s unflinching support for Ukraine in resisting Russian aggression revealed to the EU not only its dependence on American power but also the value of an alliance with the United States that no amount of trade with China could match. Consequently, the EU took initial steps to reduce its economic ties with China. Some of its member states adopted investment restrictions and export controls targeting China even though the EU leadership preferred a less jarring phrase, “derisking,” as label for its policy.56

在弗拉基米尔·普京与习近平签署联合声明，宣布建立“无限友谊”不到三周后，普京下令入侵乌克兰，欧盟与中国的关系由此发生了重大转变。这场二战以来欧洲规模最大、伤亡最惨重的战争，使得欧盟在中美竞争中维持战略中立的努力难以为继。与此同时，华盛顿坚定不移地支持乌克兰抵抗俄罗斯的侵略，这不仅让欧盟意识到自身对美国实力的依赖，也让欧盟认识到与美国结盟的价值远非与中国的贸易所能比拟。因此，欧盟开始采取措施，逐步减少与中国的经济联系。尽管欧盟领导层更倾向于使用“降低风险”这一较为温和的措辞来描述其政策，但一些成员国还是对中国实施了投资限制和出口管制。

Trade and investment data for 2023 may offer a glimpse into the trend of decoupling between China and the West. Although several factors, such as rising interest rates in the United States, the resultant economic weaknesses in the West, and China's disappointing economic growth and historically high exports in 2022, likely muddy the picture in 2023, the amount of utilized FDI in 2023 was $163.2 billion, $13.9 billion less than the previous year. While overall exports held steady in 2023, Chinese exports to the United States fell far more dramatically. Between January and September 2023, China exported about $90 billion less goods to the United States than it did in the previous year, indicating an acceleration of the bilateral "decoupling."57 In all likelihood, the full negative effects of the trade war on China's exports and inbound FDI will play out over an extended period. As Trump launches another trade war following his return to the White House in 2025, Chinese exports could suffer another devastating blow.

2023年的贸易和投资数据或许能让我们一窥中西方脱钩的趋势。尽管美国利率上升、由此导致的西方经济疲软以及中国2022年令人失望的经济增长和历史性的高出口等诸多因素可能会使2023年的情况变得复杂，但2023年实际利用的外国直接投资额为1632亿美元，比上年减少了139亿美元。虽然2023年整体出口保持稳定，但中国对美国的出口降幅却更为显著。2023年1月至9月，中国对美国的商品出口额比上年同期减少了约900亿美元，这表明双边“脱钩”正在加速。贸易战对中国出口和外国直接投资的负面影响很可能需要一段时间才能完全显现。如果特朗普在 2025 年重返白宫后再次发动贸易战，中国出口可能会遭受又一次毁灭性打击。

The short-term negative impact of the US-China trade war on the Chinese economy might be moderate, as shown by trade and investment data. But the prospect of an economic "decoupling" between the United States and China has led to the most profound change in economic policy and orientation since the post-Mao era. When Deng launched reform and opening in 1979, integration with the capitalist economies in the West, most critically the development of trade and investment ties with the United States, the world's largest and technologically most advanced economy, was a strategic priority. In the four decades that followed Deng's January 1979 historic visit to Washington, China's impressive growth record was made possible, in large part, by its broad and dense economic ties with the West, in particular the United States.

贸易和投资数据显示，中美贸易战对中国经济的短期负面影响可能较为温和。但中美经济“脱钩”的前景，已导致中国经济政策和方向发生自后毛泽东时代以来最深刻的转变。1979年邓小平启动改革开放时，与西方资本主义经济体，特别是与世界最大、技术最先进的经济体——美国——发展贸易和投资关系，是中国的一项战略重点。在邓小平1979年1月历史性访美后的四十年间，中国令人瞩目的经济增长在很大程度上得益于其与西方，特别是与美国广泛而紧密的经济联系。

The free fall of Sino-American relations in the aftermath of the trade war threatened the viability of China's development strategy that focused on economic integration with the West. By early 2020, US-China decoupling was moving ahead at full steam, threatening not only hundreds of billions of dollars in bilateral merchandise trade but also Chinese access to advanced American technologies. During the first trade war, the Trump administration simultaneously began to impose a series of sanctions on Chinese technology companies by banning them from purchasing high-end semiconductors made in the United States or made with American technologies. Following the escalation of the trade war in May 2019, the United States put China's telecom giant Huawei, a global leader in 5G technology, on the so-called Entity List, thereby requiring that American firms planning to supply Huawei must first obtain a license from the Commerce Department, with the presumption that such applications would be denied.58

贸易战后中美关系急剧恶化，威胁到中国以与西方经济一体化为核心的发展战略的可行性。到2020年初，中美脱钩进程加速，不仅威胁到数千亿美元的双边商品贸易，也威胁到中国获取美国先进技术的途径。在第一次贸易战期间，特朗普政府同时开始对中国科技公司实施一系列制裁，禁止它们购买美国制造或采用美国技术制造的高端半导体。2019年5月贸易战升级后，美国将中国电信巨头华为（5G技术领域的全球领导者）列入所谓的“实体清单”，要求计划向华为供货的美国公司必须首先获得美国商务部的许可，而此类申请很可能被拒绝。

By spring 2020, the bottom of US-China relations fell out as Trump, increasingly worried about the damage of the raging Covid-19 pandemic on his reelection bid, gave the hawks in his administration carte blanche to punish China, the source of the virus. The collapsing US-China relations in general, and the decoupling between the two countries in particular, prompted Chinese leaders to draft a new economic strategy for a changed world.

到2020年春季，美中关系跌至谷底。特朗普日益担忧新冠疫情对其连任竞选造成不利影响，于是放任政府中的鹰派肆意惩罚病毒源头——中国。美中关系的全面崩溃，尤其是两国经济的脱钩，促使中国领导人制定新的经济战略以适应不断变化的世界格局。

In May 2020 Xi articulated the "dual circulation" strategy, a central concept in China's development approach for a world of great power rivalry and economic fragmentation. According to official media, the strategy of dual circulation was first proposed at a meeting of the Politburo Standing Committee on May 13, 2020. Shortly thereafter, Xi began to personally promote this idea in his public speeches. The Politburo formally endorsed the concept at the end of July 2020.59

2020年5月，习近平提出了“双循环”战略，这是中国在大国竞争和经济碎片化的世界格局下发展战略的核心概念。据官方媒体报道，“双循环”战略最早于2020年5月13日在中共中央政治局常委会会议上提出。此后不久，习近平开始在公开讲话中亲自宣传这一理念。2020年7月底，中共中央政治局正式通过了这一战略。

The concept of dual circulation was translated into policy in November 2020, when the Fifth Plenum of the Central Committee approved the Fourteenth Five-Year Plan and proposed the development goals for 2021-2035. The "Proposal of the CCP Central Committee on Formulating the Fourteenth Five-Year Plan for National Economic and Social Development and the Long-Term Goals for 2035" explicitly puts forth a new development strategy centered on domestic demand and technological self-reliance.60

双循环理念于2020年11月转化为政策，当时中共中央五中全会批准了“十四五”规划，并提出了2021—2035年的发展目标。《中共中央关于制定国民经济和社会发展“十四五”规划和2035年远期目标的建议》明确提出了以内需和技术自力更生为核心的新发展战略。

Based on authoritative statements by Xi himself as well as by his chief economic adviser, Vice Premier Liu He, the party's new development strategy was crafted in response to America's policy of containing China's rise through economic decoupling and the tech war. In his speech to the Fifth Plenum, Xi warned: "In recent years, along with the changes in the global political and economic environment, the upsurge in deglobalization and the unilateralism and protectionism acts by certain countries, the traditional global circulation has been notably weakened." He went on to urge that efforts be made "to root China's development inside the country and rely more on the domestic market to achieve economic growth."61

根据习近平本人及其首席经济顾问、国务院副总理刘鹤的权威表态，中共的新发展战略是为了应对美国通过经济脱钩和科技战遏制中国崛起的政策而制定的。习近平在五中全会讲话中警告说：“近年来，随着全球政治经济环境的变化、去全球化的抬头以及某些国家单边主义和保护主义行径的抬头，传统的全球循环明显减弱。”他进一步强调，要“让中国的发展扎根国内，更多地依靠国内市场实现经济增长”。

Both Xi and Liu offered upbeat assessments of the feasibility of dual circulation by listing China's size advantage: a middle-income country with 1.4 billion people and a market with the largest growth potential in the world. This huge market will be able to generate sufficient domestic demand to sustain growth in the future in spite of an unfriendly external environment because consumption will rise and producers will increase efficiency through the adoption of modern technology and improvements in supply chains.62

习近平和刘晓明都对双循环的可行性给予了乐观的评估，他们列举了中国的规模优势：中国是一个拥有14亿人口的中等收入国家，也是一个拥有全球最大增长潜力的市场。尽管外部环境不利，但这个庞大的市场仍能产生足够的内需，从而在未来维持经济增长，因为消费将会增长，生产者将通过采用现代技术和改进供应链来提高效率。

As a framework document, the proposal lists key objectives. The section on generating new sources of domestic demand refers to upgrading and increasing household consumption and providing more social services. However, the document does not include new policies that might actually raise household income to increase or upgrade consumption. Investment would retain its role as a key driver of growth as the proposal offers a long list of major infrastructure projects to be built in the coming years.

作为一份框架性文件，该提案列出了关键目标。关于创造新的国内需求来源的部分提到了提升和增加家庭消费以及提供更多社会服务。然而，该文件并未包含任何可能真正提高家庭收入以促进或提升消费的新政策。投资仍将是经济增长的关键驱动力，因为该提案列出了未来几年将要建设的一系列重大基础设施项目。

In addition to reducing reliance on external demand, the proposal also calls for greater resilience and security of supply chains and technological self-sufficiency. Reflecting his awareness of China's vulnerability to Western technological sanctions, Xi set the goal of resilience of supply chains in April 2020 when he addressed the Central Finance Small Group, the party's top economic decision-making body. He urged, "In order to ensure our industrial security and national security, we must strive to build self-reliant, controllable, secure, and dependable production and supply chains. We must seek to have at least one alternative source for critical products and supplies." In a veiled but obvious reference to a potential conflict with the United States, Xi stated that he believed that more resilient and secure supply chains centered domestically would help China increase its national security and allow it to "maintain normal economic activities under extreme conditions."63

除了减少对外部需求的依赖外，该提案还呼吁增强供应链的韧性和安全性，并实现技术自主。习近平意识到中国易受西方技术制裁的影响，于2020年4月在中央财政小组会议上提出增强供应链韧性的目标。中央财政小组是中共最高经济决策机构。他强调：“为了保障产业安全和国家安全，我们必须努力构建自力更生、可控、安全可靠的生产供应链。关键产品和物资至少要有一个备选来源。” 习近平在讲话中隐晦地提及了与美国可能发生的冲突，他表示，他相信以国内为中心、更具韧性和安全的供应链将有助于中国增强国家安全，并使中国能够在极端条件下“维持正常的经济活动”。

The proposals of the Fifth Plenum add more details to Xi's concept of economic security. Judging by the space devoted to technological self-sufficiency, it is evident that the party views this as an overriding priority. Section III of the proposals contain specific ambitious programs designed to enable China to develop indigenous capabilities and overcome the West's technological containment. These include formulation of a comprehensive plan that would mobilize the resources of the entire nation to achieve new scientific and technological progress, in particular in emerging areas such as artificial intelligence (AI), quantum computing, semiconductors, and life sciences. Also mentioned are new large national research projects, talent recruitment programs, and incentives for innovation by domestic entities.64

五中全会的提案进一步细化了习近平提出的经济安全理念。从提案中对技术自给自足的篇幅来看，显然中共将其视为重中之重。提案第三部分包含一系列雄心勃勃的具体计划，旨在使中国能够发展自主能力，突破西方的技术封锁。这些计划包括制定一项综合规划，调动全国资源，在人工智能、量子计算、半导体和生命科学等新兴领域取得新的科技进步。此外，提案还提及了新的大型国家科研项目、人才引进计划以及对国内企业创新的激励措施。

Even though Xi tried to strike a balance between development and security, his speech to the plenum implies that security should override development. According to Xi, it will be wise to "overestimate difficulties [and] deepen our thinking about risks," implying that in devising a development strategy, China must give more weight to potential security risks.65 The proposal duly reflects Xi's broadened definition of security risks by declaring that China "must maintain its ability to secure and control critical industries, infrastructure, strategic resources, and major scientific and technological areas."66

尽管习近平试图在发展与安全之间取得平衡，但他在全会上的讲话暗示安全应优先于发展。习近平指出，要“高估困难，深化风险思考”，这意味着中国在制定发展战略时必须更加重视潜在的安全风险。该提议也体现了习近平对安全风险的更广泛定义，他宣称中国“必须保持对关键产业、基础设施、战略资源和重大科技领域的安全和管控能力”。

On the surface, Xi's vision of dual circulation does not entail severing ties with the global economy. But it is clear that dual circulation would consist primarily of "great domestic circulation" based on reliable domestic demand and secure sources of technology.67 In the years following issuance of this landmark document, the party implemented several measures to turn Xi's vision into reality. The bulk of efforts in 2021-2023 were on building a domestic semiconductor supply chain to overcome US-led efforts to cut off China's access to advanced chips.

表面上看，习近平提出的“双循环”构想并不意味着切断与全球经济的联系。但显然，“双循环”主要由以可靠的国内需求和可靠的技术来源为基础的“大国内循环”构成。在这一里程碑式文件发布后的几年里，中共实施了多项措施，将习近平的构想变为现实。2021年至2023年期间，重点工作是构建国内半导体供应链，以应对美国主导的切断中国获取先进芯片的企图。

In September 2023 China launched a new $40 billion state-backed fund to invest in the semiconductor industry. This was on top of the nearly $48 billion the government had raised between 2014 and 2019 for the China Integrated Circuit Industry Investment Fund (ICF), commonly known as the "Big Fund."68 Although establishment of the Big Fund in 2014 long preceded the US-China tech war, Beijing's additional investment in September 2023 was definitely a direct response to America's escalating export controls to cripple China's semiconductor sector, in particular the package of measures the Biden administration unveiled in October 2022 that sought to block Chinese access to high-end chips and the equipment capable of producing them.

2023年9月，中国启动了一项规模达400亿美元的国家支持基金，用于投资半导体产业。此前，中国政府已在2014年至2019年间为中国集成电路产业投资基金（简称“大基金”）筹集了近480亿美元。尽管大基金的设立远早于中美科技战，但北京在2023年9月追加的投资无疑是对美国不断升级的出口管制措施的直接回应，这些措施旨在削弱中国的半导体产业，尤其是拜登政府于2022年10月公布的一系列旨在阻止中国获取高端芯片及其生产设备的措施。

Despite Xi's repeated invocation of the dire need for greater economic security, aside from increasing R&D there were few effective measures the party could undertake in the short term. Although China stepped up efforts to reduce its reliance on the US dollar by denominating more trade in renminbi, its use of the dollar was unlikely to fall dramatically simply because there were no alternatives in the foreseeable future for China to settle trade and manage its huge foreign exchange reserves.69 Food self-sufficiency, another prized security goal Xi has emphasized repeatedly, is also unlikely to be achieved in the near term because China does not have enough arable land, and its food self-sufficiency ratio was only 66 percent as of 2020.70

尽管习近平反复强调迫切需要加强经济安全，但除了加大研发投入外，党在短期内能采取的有效措施寥寥无几。虽然中国加大了对美元的依赖，增加了人民币结算贸易，但美元使用量不太可能大幅下降，因为在可预见的未来，中国没有其他替代方案来结算贸易和管理其庞大的外汇储备。粮食自给自足是习近平反复强调的另一项重要的安全目标，但短期内也难以实现，因为中国耕地面积有限，截至2020年，粮食自给率仅为66%。

But Chinese leaders are unlikely to be deterred by the challenge of building up an economic fortress. The costs of such an undertaking will be staggering. "Forced import substitution" in the case of advance technologies will make China reallocate resources to economic activities for which it lacks a comparative advantage. Achieving food self-sufficiency by producing more grains domestically at the expense of higher-value cash crops will reduce income from agriculture. Shifting supplies away from the United States and its allies will cut competition and increase costs. Chinese manufacturers that rely excessively on the domestic market will not be competitive with their global peers. Regardless of the culpability of the US-China decoupling and tech war, the end result of China's response—a security-focused development strategy—will be less economic efficiency and lower growth for the long term. For the party and Xi, this seems a price worth paying if the alternative will place China at the mercy of a hostile West that sees a powerful China as an existential threat.

但中国领导人不太可能被构建经济堡垒的挑战吓倒。这项工程的代价将是巨大的。“强制进口替代”（尤其是在先进技术领域）将迫使中国把资源重新分配到自身缺乏比较优势的经济活动上。为了实现粮食自给自足，牺牲高价值经济作物的种植，增加国内粮食产量，将会降低农业收入。减少对美国及其盟友的依赖，会削弱竞争，增加成本。过度依赖国内市场的中国制造商将无法与全球同行竞争。无论中美脱钩和科技战的责任归属如何，中国最终采取的应对措施——以安全为中心的经济发展战略——都将导致长期经济效率降低和增长放缓。对于中共及习近平而言，如果另一种选择是让中国受制于将强大的中国视为生存威胁的敌对西方，那么这样的代价似乎是值得的。





Reversion to Statism





回归国家主义


The CCP's schizophrenic attitude toward the private sector is well-known. On the one hand, the party's imperative of sustaining performance legitimacy dictates a pragmatic approach to the private sector, the largest contributor to economic output. On the other hand, political distrust of private entrepreneurs, lingering ideological hostility to capitalism, and entrenched regime interests to preserve a large state sector motivate the party to discriminate against the private sector regardless of the loss of efficiency.71 In practice, such discrimination manifests itself in regulatory barriers restricting the entry of private firms into strategic sectors (such as finance, energy, and telecom), favorable access to credit and subsidies for SOEs, and harassment and mistreatment of private firms by local authorities that see them as easy prey.72 In spite of government discrimination, however, private firms thrived in the post-Tiananmen era, as evidenced by their growing share of GDP, urban employment, and exports.73

中共对私营部门的矛盾态度众所周知。一方面，为了维护执政的合法性，中共必须对私营部门采取务实的态度，因为私营部门是经济产出的最大贡献者。另一方面，对私营企业家的政治不信任、对资本主义挥之不去的意识形态敌意，以及根深蒂固的政权维护庞大国有部门的利益，促使执政党不顾效率损失，对私营部门进行歧视。71 在实践中，这种歧视表现为：监管壁垒限制私营企业进入战略部门（如金融、能源和电信），国有企业享有信贷和补贴的优惠待遇，以及地方政府将私营企业视为易受攻击的目标，对其进行骚扰和虐待。72 然而，尽管存在政府歧视，私营企业在后天安门时代依然蓬勃发展，其在GDP、城镇就业和出口中所占份额的增长便是明证。73

Complaints that "the state advances and the private retreats" (guojin min-tui) became more frequent toward the end of the Hu Jintao era, prompted mostly by the government's massive stimulus package implemented in 2009 to sustain growth following the global financial crisis. As the state sector was the primary beneficiary of the package, which consisted of four trillion yuan in fiscal spending and an infusion of bank credit several times that amount, the government's response elicited concerns that party policy toward the private sector was being reversed. Additionally, the government encouraged giant SOEs to acquire other (usually struggling) SOEs and even well-established private firms.74

在胡锦涛时代末期，“国进民退”的抱怨日益频繁，这主要是由于政府在2009年为应对全球金融危机而实施的大规模经济刺激计划所致。由于国有企业是该计划的主要受益者（该计划包括4万亿元人民币的财政支出和数倍于此的银行信贷注入），政府的应对措施引发了人们对党对私营部门政策逆转的担忧。此外，政府还鼓励大型国有企业收购其他（通常是经营困难的）国有企业，甚至收购成熟的民营企业。

In the post-Tiananmen era, the state had always maintained an extensive presence in the economy, but the pivot back to statism at the expense of the private sector became more pronounced after 2009.75 However, like the shift toward a more assertive foreign policy and a regressive domestic agenda, guojin mintui on the eve of Xi's rise to power lacked an ideologically coherent program and was notable for the absence of a high-profile crackdown on iconic private firms or well-known private entrepreneurs. All this would change under Xi.

在后天安门时代，国家一直对经济保持着广泛的影响力，但2009年后，以牺牲私营部门为代价的回归国家主义的趋势愈发明显。然而，与外交政策趋于强硬、国内政策趋于保守一样，习近平上台前夕的国民经济缺乏意识形态上的连贯性纲领，尤其值得注意的是，当时并未对标志性的私营企业或知名企业家进行大规模打压。这一切在习近平的领导下都将发生改变。

Before his ascent to the top, Xi had said or done few things that revealed his views of the private sector. His three-and-one-half-year stint as party chief of Zhejiang province (November 2002 to March 2007) may bolster his image as a probusiness official, but his record in Zhejiang contains no evidence of major initiatives that supported the private sector. As an astute politician, Xi was careful to avoid close ties with wealthy private entrepreneurs. Although his extended family members had reportedly amassed large fortunes through questionable business deals, Xi and his immediate family are not known to have been implicated in corruption.76

在登上权力巅峰之前，习近平很少公开表达或展现其对私营部门的看法。他担任浙江省委书记三年半（2002年11月至2007年3月）的经历或许强化了他亲商官员的形象，但他在浙江的政绩中并无任何支持私营部门的重大举措。作为一位精明的政治家，习近平谨慎地避免与富有的私营企业家建立密切联系。尽管据报道他的一些远亲通过可疑的商业交易积累了巨额财富，但习近平及其直系亲属并未卷入任何腐败丑闻。

Only after he became party chief did Xi reveal what he really thought about the relationship between the state and the private sector. His rhetoric grew more unabashedly supportive of the state sector after he quietly abandoned the reform blueprint unveiled with great fanfare in November 2013. In October 2016 he emphasized that SOEs are "an important material and political basis for socialism with Chinese characteristics and an important pillar and reliable force for the CCP's governance of the country," and that the party will "firmly and unwaveringly make SOEs stronger, bigger, and better."77

习近平担任中共中央总书记后，才真正揭示了他对国家与私营部门关系的看法。在悄然放弃了2013年11月高调公布的改革方案后，他对国有企业的支持言论变得更加公开。2016年10月，他强调国有企业是“中国特色社会主义的重要物质和政治基础，是中共治国的重要支柱和可靠力量”，并表示党将“坚定不移地把国有企业建设得更强大、更大、更好”。

In terms of policy, however, the party did not adopt one single major policy package to roll back the private sector. Early on, Xi launched a campaign to force private and foreign-invested companies to establish party organizations as a means of asserting political control.78 Later, policies that favored the state sector over the private sector were rolled out in a piecemeal fashion until Xi ordered a more drastic crackdown on the private sector that began in late 2020. The first prong of Xi's economic strategy to preserve the state sector as the "dominant entity" was the 2015 unveiling of "Made in China 2025." Although China had proposed similar industrial policy packages with aspirational goals in the past, "Made in China 2025," a ten-year, state-led industrial strategy to establish China's global dominance in the high-tech manufacturing industry and to reduce its dependence on foreign technology, was far more ambitious and controversial.79 China's main trading partners in the West saw it as an undisguised effort by China to displace the West as the global technological leader. The plan stipulated that China would attain 70 percent self-sufficiency in high-tech industries by 2025 and would achieve a leading position in global markets by 2049, the centennial of the People's Republic of China.80 In addition to the worrisome security implications, "Made in China 2025" also involved massive government subsidies and protectionist measures that were bound to conflict with the West's economic interests. At home, it would funnel huge resources to the state sector, which was tasked with realizing the ambitious goals.

然而，在政策层面，中共并未采取单一的重大政策方案来限制私营企业。习近平早期发起了一场运动，强制私营企业和外商投资企业建立党组织，以此来加强政治控制。之后，有利于国有企业而非私营企业的政策陆续出台，直到2020年底，习近平下令对私营企业进行更为严厉的打压。习近平旨在维护国有企业“主导地位”的经济战略的第一步，便是2015年提出的“中国制造2025”。尽管中国过去也曾提出过类似的产业政策方案，并设定了宏伟的目标，但“中国制造2025”——一项为期十年、由国家主导的产业战略，旨在确立中国在全球高科技制造业的主导地位，并降低对外国技术的依赖——则更具雄心，也更具争议性。中国在西方的主要贸易伙伴将其视为中国试图取代西方成为全球技术领导者的明目张胆之举。该计划规定，到2025年，中国高科技产业的自给率将达到70%，到2049年，即中华人民共和国成立一百周年之际，将在全球市场占据领先地位。除了令人担忧的安全隐患外，“中国制造2025”还涉及巨额政府补贴和保护主义措施，这些措施势必会与西方的经济利益产生冲突。在国内，它将向国有部门输送大量资源，由国有部门负责实现这些雄心勃勃的目标。

Another step the party undertook to bolster SOEs was to make them even bigger, a trend that had started under Hu. Giant SOEs directly under the control of the central government acquired small and poor-performing ones, ostensibly to increase the economies of scale. During Xi's first term, SASAC engineered some of the largest mergers of SOEs in history, such as the combination of CSR Corporation and CNR Corporation, two manufacturers of locomotives and rolling stock in 2015, as well as several others. Based on data provided by SASAC, such mergers did make the centrally controlled SOEs bigger, as measured by their assets. But their efficiency actually declined, and their debt-to-asset ratio rose.81

为加强国有企业实力，中共采取的另一项措施是扩大其规模，这一趋势始于胡锦涛时期。中央直接控制的巨型国有企业收购了规模小、业绩差的企业，表面上是为了提高规模经济效益。在习近平第一任期内，国资委主导了一些历史上规模最大的国有企业并购案，例如2015年中车集团和中车集团这两家机车车辆制造商的合并，以及其他几起并购案。根据国资委提供的数据，这些并购确实扩大了中央控制的国有企业的规模（以资产衡量）。但它们的效率实际上下降了，资产负债率上升了。

The government's direct intervention in the stock market in 2015 is another example of the revival of statism under Xi. Starting in June 2014, China's stock markets began a bull run. Investor exuberance, fueled in part by the official media, drove the main index on the Shanghai Stock Exchange up more than 150 percent within the year. When the bubble began to burst in mid-June 2015, the top leadership viewed the slide in stock prices as a negative reflection of its economic stewardship and ordered that the "national team"—mainly state-owned financial entities—pour trillions of yuan into the market to support the prices. This intervention failed miserably. In addition to the waste of huge amounts of money, the government-orchestrated rescue did not stop the crash. By the time the market stabilized in March 2016, the Shanghai index was down 45 percent from its peak.82 Although this was not the first time the Chinese state had intervened to prevent stock prices from collapsing, it had never before engineered such a broad, costly, and ultimately doomed effort.

2015年政府直接干预股市是习近平领导下国家主义复兴的又一例证。2014年6月起，中国股市开启牛市。在官方媒体的推波助澜下，投资者热情高涨，推动上海证券交易所主要股指在一年内上涨超过150%。2015年6月中旬，泡沫开始破裂，最高领导层将股价下跌视为其经济管理不善的体现，并下令由国有金融机构组成的“国家队”向市场注入数万亿元人民币以支撑股价。然而，这次干预彻底失败。政府主导的救助不仅浪费了巨额资金，也未能阻止股市崩盘。到 2016 年 3 月市场企稳时，上证指数已从峰值下跌了 45%。尽管这并非中国政府第一次干预股市以防止股价暴跌，但此前从未进行过如此大规模、代价高昂且最终失败的干预行动。

In addition to channeling resources to the state sector, the government also implemented policies that systematically hurt the private sector. An early indication of policies that were less friendly to private entrepreneurs was the dramatic reduction in loans to the private sector by state-owned banks. In 2013 about 57 percent of all loans flowed to nonfinancial private firms. But this trend was reversed in 2014, when only 34 percent of such loans went to nonfinancial private firms. By 2015, only a trickle of credit—19 percent—was made available to nonfinancial firms. When the government launched its "deleveraging" campaign in 2016, private firms were hit especially hard. In that year, their share of credit collapsed to 11 percent.83

除了将资源导向国有部门外，政府还实施了一系列系统性地损害私营部门的政策。国有银行大幅削减对私营部门的贷款，便是这些政策对私营企业家不太友好的早期迹象。2013年，约57%的贷款流向了非金融私营企业。但这一趋势在2014年发生了逆转，当年只有34%的此类贷款流向了非金融私营企业。到2015年，流向非金融企业的信贷仅占19%。2016年，政府启动“去杠杆化”运动，私营企业受到的冲击尤为严重。当年，它们的信贷份额骤降至11%。

Private firms were easy targets during the deleveraging campaign between 2016 and mid-2018 because, in spite of their efficiency, they had costly and unstable access to credit. As state-owned banks require collateral from private firms and fear responsibility if their loans to private firms go sour, private firms must primarily rely on the shadow banking system (trust companies and wealth management firms) to borrow short-term loans at higher interest rates. Consequently, when the government required that the entire financial system reduce its leverage, the supply of credit to private firms fell because the state-owned banks could call back loans to shrink their balance sheets, whereas the shadow banking system, which indirectly also relied on the formal banking system for funding, was forced to cut credit to private firms.84

在2016年至2018年中期的去杠杆化运动中，私营企业很容易成为目标，因为尽管它们效率高，但获得信贷的成本高昂且不稳定。由于国有银行要求私营企业提供抵押品，并且担心如果其对私营企业的贷款出现不良后果，私营企业不得不主要依赖影子银行体系（信托公司和财富管理公司）以更高的利率借入短期贷款。因此，当政府要求整个金融体系降低杠杆率时，私营企业的信贷供应下降，因为国有银行可以收回贷款以缩减资产负债表，而间接依赖正规银行体系融资的影子银行体系则被迫削减对私营企业的信贷。

The negative impact of deleveraging on the private sector can be seen in the slower growth of the number of private firms and their employment, and, more important, the relative decline of the private sector as an investor in the domestic economy. In the three years (2013-2015) prior to the deleveraging campaign, the number of private firms and their employment numbers had grown, on average, 20.6 percent and 11.9 percent, respectively. During the three years of deleveraging (2016-2018), the corresponding numbers were 18.1 percent and 10.1 percent, respectively, indicating the slower growth of the private sector.85

去杠杆化对私营部门的负面影响体现在私营企业数量及其就业人数增长放缓，更重要的是，私营部门作为国内经济投资者的作用相对下降。在去杠杆化行动之前的三年（2013-2015年），私营企业数量及其就业人数平均分别增长了20.6%和11.9%。而在去杠杆化的三年（2016-2018年）期间，这两个数字分别下降至18.1%和10.1%，表明私营部门的增长速度放缓。

Investment data during this period paint an even clearer picture of the retreat of the private sector under Xi. In 2016 and 2017, the height of the deleveraging campaign, private sector investment in fixed assets grew only 2.8 and 5.2 percent, respectively. By comparison, investment by SOEs rose 18.7 and 10.1 percent, respectively, providing evidence that the deleveraging campaign was not having a negative impact on SOEs.86 Overall, the private sector's investment did not recover in the wake of the campaign. Official data show that private investment in fixed assets peaked at 58.9 percent of the total in 2014. In 2016, the first year of the deleveraging campaign, it fell to 56.3 percent. By 2019, the year before the pandemic, it accounted for 56.8 percent of total fixed asset investment.87

这一时期的投资数据更清晰地展现了习近平领导下私营部门的退缩趋势。在去杠杆化运动的高峰期——2016年和2017年，私营部门对固定资产的投资分别仅增长了2.8%和5.2%。相比之下，国有企业的投资分别增长了18.7%和10.1%，这表明去杠杆化运动并未对国有企业产生负面影响。总体而言，去杠杆化运动结束后，私营部门的投资并未恢复。官方数据显示，私营部门对固定资产的投资占比在2014年达到峰值，占总投资的58.9%。在去杠杆化运动的第一年——2016年，这一比例下降至56.3%。到疫情爆发前一年——2019年，这一比例为56.8%。

If major economic policies, such as "Made in China 2025" and the deleveraging campaign, hurt the private sector indirectly, the crackdown on the private sector that occurred in 2021 was fully motivated by political concerns. Prior to the Xi era, the party did not implement policies that would be seen as blatantly hostile to the private sector, even though the government consistently favored the SOEs. All this would change during Xi's second term.

如果说“中国制造2025”和去杠杆化运动等重大经济政策间接损害了私营部门，那么2021年对私营部门的打压则完全是出于政治考量。在习近平时代之前，尽管政府一贯偏袒国有企业，但中共并未推行任何被视为公然敌视私营部门的政策。这一切在习近平的第二个任期内发生了改变。

Xi's first shot signaling a major shift in the party's policy was the abrupt suspension of the Initial Public Offering (IPO) of a private firm, the Ant Group, on November 3, 2020 (the IPO was later cancelled). The Ant Group, a fintech company affiliated with the e-commerce giant Alibaba, was on course to raise a record $37 billion by listing its shares in Hong Kong and Shanghai. But on the eve of the IPO, Xi reportedly ordered that Chinese regulators scuttle the Ant Group's listing.88 One factor that allegedly drove Xi to intervene personally was the discovery that families of several senior retired officials were early investors in the group and would have reaped small fortunes if the IPO had gone ahead.89

习近平发出党的政策重大转变信号的第一击，是于2020年11月3日突然叫停了蚂蚁集团的首次公开募股（IPO）（该IPO后来被取消）。蚂蚁集团是一家与电商巨头阿里巴巴有关联的金融科技公司，原计划通过在香港和上海上市筹集创纪录的370亿美元资金。但在IPO前夕，据报道，习近平下令中国监管机构叫停蚂蚁集团的上市。据称，促使习近平亲自干预的一个因素是，他发现几位退休高级官员的家属是该集团的早期投资者，如果IPO成功，他们将获得巨额财富。

The real reason appears to be Xi's fears that the private sector could erode the party's control of a vital economic sector—the financial system. At a Politburo seminar on the digital economy on October 18, 2020, shortly before his intervention, Xi gave a speech emphasizing the need to "prevent the expansion of platform monopolies (such as Alibaba) and the disorderly expansion of capital."90 In retrospect, cancellation of the Ant Group IPO is not an isolated incident but rather the beginning of a concerted crackdown directed by Xi to rein in "the disorderly expansion of capital."

真正的原因似乎是习近平担心私营部门会削弱党对一个至关重要的经济部门——金融体系——的控制。在2020年10月18日举行的政治局数字经济研讨会上，就在他介入此事前不久，习近平发表讲话，强调要“防止平台垄断（如阿里巴巴）扩张和资本无序扩张”。事后看来，蚂蚁集团IPO的取消并非孤立事件，而是习近平指示开展的遏制“资本无序扩张”的全面打击的开端。

The campaign quickly claimed most of China's high-tech firms, in particular its e-commerce platform companies. After abandoning the IPO of the Ant Group, Alibaba was fined a record eighteen billion yuan in April 2021 for breaking antitrust regulations. Well-known tech giants, such as Tencent, Meituan, Baidu, Didi, JD.com, and others, were later ordered to pay huge fines for alleged violations of the antimonopoly law and data security regulations.91 But compared with those private firms providing after-school coaching services, these tech firms were far luckier. Xi's crackdown on the platform economy diminished their status and precipitated a plunge in their stock prices that destroyed $1.1 trillion in market value within two years.92 But they remained in business.

这场运动迅速席卷了中国大部分高科技企业，尤其是电商平台公司。在放弃蚂蚁集团IPO后，阿里巴巴于2021年4月因违反反垄断法规被处以创纪录的180亿元人民币罚款。腾讯、美团、百度、滴滴、京东等知名科技巨头随后也因涉嫌违反反垄断法和数据安全法规而被勒令支付巨额罚款。但与那些提供课后辅导服务的私营企业相比，这些科技公司要幸运得多。习近平对平台经济的打压削弱了它们的地位，并导致其股价暴跌，两年内市值蒸发了1.1万亿美元。但它们仍然得以继续运营。

By comparison, the after-school coaching industry, which had generated $100 billion in revenue annually, was completely wiped out after the government announced a nationwide ban on July 21, 2023. This crackdown, again allegedly carried out at the direction of Xi, was supposedly motivated by the government's desire to make the education playing field more equal. Because of fierce competition for slots in high-quality middle schools and prestigious universities, Chinese parents sent their children to after-school tutoring programs in hopes that they would then perform better on exams. Xi likely saw this industry as perpetuating inequality since only the well-off could afford the extra costs. However, his drastic solution—banning the entire industry as part of a program to reduce the students' academic burdens and their families' expenses for after-school tutoring—merely addressed the symptom of the problem but failed to deal with its root causes, that is, the inadequate supply of high-quality education and a culture obsessed with exams.93

相比之下，年收入高达1000亿美元的课外辅导行业在政府于2023年7月21日宣布全国取缔后彻底消失。据称，此次打击行动同样是在习近平的指示下进行的，其动机是政府希望创造一个更加公平的教育环境。由于优质中学和名牌大学的入学名额竞争激烈，中国家长纷纷将孩子送去课外辅导班，希望他们能在考试中取得更好的成绩。习近平可能认为这个行业加剧了不平等，因为只有富裕家庭才能负担得起额外的费用。然而，他采取的极端措施——取缔整个行业，以此减轻学生的学业负担和家庭的课外辅导支出——仅仅治标不治本，未能解决问题的根源，即优质教育供给不足和应试文化盛行。

This crackdown backfired disasterously. The draconian ban on an entire privately run industry was unprecedented in the post-Mao era. Overnight it destroyed a large number of private businesses and made hundreds of thousands of people working in the industry jobless. Most important, the crackdown was a wake-up call to private entrepreneurs that their property rights were totally insecure under CCP rule. The crackdown failed to achieve its objective as it merely drove the industry underground, raising the costs for parents and making access to after-school coaching even more unequal than before the crackdown.94

这次镇压行动适得其反，造成了灾难性的后果。对整个私营行业实施如此严厉的禁令，在后毛泽东时代是前所未有的。一夜之间，大量私营企业倒闭，数十万从业人员失业。更重要的是，这次镇压行动给私营企业家敲响了警钟，让他们意识到在中共统治下，他们的财产权完全得不到保障。镇压行动未能达到预期目的，反而迫使该行业转入地下，增加了家长的负担，使得课后辅导机会的分配比镇压前更加不均等。





The Covid Pandemic





新冠疫情


When the Covid-19 pandemic first surfaced in Wuhan in December 2019, the Chinese economy was already in a precarious state. The housing bubble was on the verge of its inevitable burst. Overall levels of debt were at record highs, limiting the government's ability to use credit-fueled investment to prop up growth. Although the economy managed to expand by 6.4 percent in 2019, this was 25 percent less than growth in 2012, the year Xi ascended to the top.95 But even this moderate rate of growth would be beyond reach in the wake of the pandemic. A combination of adverse factors after the spread of the Covid-19 pandemic was responsible for the economy's lackluster performance. The most obvious reason was the direct economic cost of the pandemic as lockdowns inflicted lasting economic damage. Ill-advised government policies—an inflexible zero-Covid policy and refusal to stimulate the economy with fiscal spending—caused needless pain throughout the period of the pandemic.

2019年12月新冠疫情在武汉爆发时，中国经济已岌岌可危。房地产泡沫濒临破裂，整体债务水平处于历史高位，限制了政府利用信贷驱动投资来提振经济增长的能力。尽管2019年中国经济实现了6.4%的增长，但仍比习近平上台执政的2012年低了25%。然而，疫情爆发后，即使是这样的温和增长速度也难以企及。新冠疫情蔓延后，一系列不利因素共同导致了经济表现低迷。最显而易见的原因是疫情带来的直接经济损失，封锁措施造成了持久的经济损害。政府不明智的政策——僵化的“零感染”政策以及拒绝通过财政支出刺激经济——在疫情期间造成了不必要的痛苦。

Unlike Western countries that provided substantial Covid relief to businesses and ordinary people immediately after the pandemic struck, Beijing offered no material relief either to businesses or to individuals. At least seven million small private businesses went bust in 2020 and 2021.96 To be fair, zero-Covid—the party's immediate response to the pandemic—was probably the correct policy in the early days of the pandemic, and it did succeed in containing the virus quickly and restoring most economic activities by the middle of 2020. However, when a more contagious variant—omicron—emerged at the end of 2021, zero-Covid proved to be both ineffective and prohibitively costly. Although nearly all countries gave up zero-Covid when omicron morphed into the dominant strain, China doubled down in 2022. It enforced population-wide tests and imposed lengthy lockdowns on entire cities. In September 2022, for example, more than 300 million people in over seventy cities were under full or partial lockdown.97

与疫情爆发后立即向企业和民众提供大量新冠救助的西方国家不同，北京并未向企业或个人提供任何实质性援助。2020年和2021年，至少有700万家小型私营企业倒闭。平心而论，中共最初应对疫情的“零新冠”政策在疫情初期或许是正确的，它确实成功地迅速控制了病毒传播，并在2020年中期恢复了大部分经济活动。然而，当一种传染性更强的变种——奥密克戎毒株——在2021年底出现时，“零新冠”政策被证明既无效又代价高昂。尽管几乎所有国家在奥密克戎毒株演变为主要毒株后都放弃了“零新冠”政策，但中国在2022年却加倍投入。它实施了全民检测，并对整个城市实施了长时间的封锁。例如，2022年9月，超过70个城市的3亿多人处于全部或部分封锁状态。

Shanghai, the country's largest city with a population of over twenty-two million under lockdown from March to May in 2022, became China's most prominent victim of the zero-Covid policy. The primary reason for the party's continuation of this policy even after its ineffectiveness became abundantly clear is almost certainly Xi's own personal political interest. The strongman was seeking a norm-busting third term as CCP chief at the Twentieth Party Congress scheduled for the fall of 2022. Worried that an uncontrollable outbreak of infections ahead of the congress would dent his image and mar an important political event designed to establish his open-ended rule, Xi had compelling incentives to demand that local party officials continue to enforce zero-Covid regardless of the costs. This argument is supported by the fact that Xi decided to abandon the policy suddenly at the end of November—one month after the conclusion of the Twentieth Party Congress. Although the spread of antilockdown protests likely made Xi act sooner than he had originally planned, zero-Covid was no longer critical to him after the congress duly handed him a third term and allowed him to pack the Politburo with loyalists.98

上海是中国最大的城市，拥有超过2200万人口，在2022年3月至5月期间实施了封城，成为中国“清零”政策最显著的受害者。即便该政策的无效性已昭然若揭，中共仍然继续推行，其主要原因几乎可以肯定是习近平的个人政治利益。这位强人正寻求在2022年秋季召开的中共二十大上打破常规，连任中共总书记第三个任期。习近平担心，在党代会召开前夕，疫情一旦失控，将损害他的形象，并破坏这场旨在确立其无限期统治的重要政治盛会。因此，他有强烈的动机要求地方党政官员不惜一切代价继续执行“清零”政策。习近平在11月底——也就是中共二十大闭幕一个月后——突然决定放弃该政策，也印证了这一论点。尽管反封锁抗议活动的蔓延可能迫使习近平比原计划更早采取行动，但在党代会顺利赋予他第三个任期并允许他将亲信安插到政治局之后，清零疫情对他来说已不再至关重要。

The damage caused by Xi's zero-Covid policy is both measurable and incalculable at the same time. Despite the party's claim that this strategy kept China's Covid-related fatalities among the lowest in the world, researchers estimate that as many as 1.87 million excess deaths in China occurred among individuals thirty years and older during the first two months after the end of its zero-Covid policy.99 This is more than the total number of deaths (1.158 million) attributed to Covid-19 in the United States as of December 2023 (China has a population more than four times that of the United States).100 Due to disruptions caused by the zero-Covid lockdowns, the Chinese economy grew only 2.9 percent in 2022, marking the slowest growth in the post-Mao era and well below the official target of 5.5 percent. The invisible damage to the policy includes the loss of confidence among private entrepreneurs and foreign investors in CCP competence. The party's headstrong insistence on zero-Covid despite its ineffectiveness and mounting economic toll is a painful reminder that the narrow political interests of the Chinese regime and its personalistic ruler will always outweigh economic considerations. The one-two punch of Russia's invasion of Ukraine and the nationwide economic disruptions attributed to Xi's zero-Covid policy likely accelerated foreign investors' plans to diversify their supply chains away from China so as to reduce exposure to potential geopolitical black swan events. For domestic private entrepreneurs, the party's behavior during the pandemic reinforced a desire to seek safe havens outside of China for their assets and themselves. About twenty-five thousand "high-net-worth" Chinese reportedly emigrated in 2022 and 2023.101

习近平的“清零”政策造成的损害既可衡量又不可估量。尽管中共声称该策略使中国新冠肺炎死亡率保持在世界最低水平之列，但研究人员估计，在“清零”政策结束后的头两个月，中国30岁及以上人群的超额死亡人数高达187万。这一数字超过了截至2023年12月美国新冠肺炎死亡总人数（115.8万）（中国人口是美国的四倍多）。由于“清零”封锁措施造成的经济中断，中国经济在2022年仅增长2.9%，创下后毛泽东时代最低增速，远低于5.5%的官方目标。该政策造成的隐性损害还包括私营企业家和外国投资者对中共执政能力的信心下降。尽管疫情防控措施收效甚微且造成日益严重的经济损失，但中共仍一意孤行地坚持“清零”政策，这令人痛心地提醒我们，中国政权及其个人主义领导人的狭隘政治利益永远凌驾于经济考量之上。俄罗斯入侵乌克兰以及习近平“清零”政策导致的全国性经济混乱，很可能加速了外国投资者将供应链从中国转移出去的计划，以降低潜在地缘政治“黑天鹅”事件的风险。对于国内私营企业家而言，中共在疫情期间的行为更加强化了他们寻求海外避险的愿望，以保障自身和资产的安全。据报道，2022年和2023年约有2.5万名“高净值”中国人移居海外。

After it abandoned the zero-Covid policy in December 2022, the party hoped that the economy would bounce back. But despite an initial robust recovery in early 2023, growth stalled as the real estate crisis deepened. Given its size, the burst of the real estate bubble was obviously the most important factor leading to China's economic underperformance in 2023. In addition to registering lower than expected growth in 2023, the Chinese economy continued to struggle in 2024, weighed down by deflation, exodus of foreign firms, escalating trade tensions, and further deterioration in the collapsing real estate sector.

2022年12月放弃“零新增”政策后，中共曾寄希望于经济能够反弹。然而，尽管2023年初经济出现强劲复苏，但随着房地产危机的加剧，增长势头随即停滞。鉴于其规模之大，房地产泡沫破裂显然是导致中国2023年经济表现不佳的最重要因素。除了2023年增速低于预期外，中国经济在2024年继续举步维艰，受到通缩、外资撤离、贸易紧张局势升级以及房地产行业进一步崩盘等诸多因素的拖累。





Summary





概括


In retrospect, the end of the Chinese "economic miracle," which coincided with the Covid pandemic, is largely due to the many policy failures that preceded Xi's rise. Topping the list is the failure to undertake genuine reforms to correct macroeconomic imbalances. Such reforms would have entailed increasing real household income by providing more social services and protection. But because the party during the Hu era made at most modest progress in increasing social spending, the macroeconomic imbalances remained uncorrected, and thus they continued unabated into the Xi era.

回望过去，中国“经济奇迹”的终结（恰逢新冠疫情爆发）很大程度上归咎于习近平上台前诸多政策的失误。其中最主要的问题是未能进行真正意义上的改革来纠正宏观经济失衡。此类改革本应通过提供更多社会服务和保障来提高居民实际收入。但由于胡锦涛执政时期党在增加社会支出方面进展甚微，宏观经济失衡问题始终未能得到纠正，并延续到了习近平时代。

The party created an unprecedented credit bubble that began in 2009 and reached a dangerous magnitude by 2023, as described earlier in this chapter. Even though Xi implemented a deleveraging campaign in 2016, it achieved only modest results and had to be abandoned in mid-2018 in response to the US-China trade war. Consequently, the bubble grew so big that, when zero-Covid ended in December 2022, another major infusion of credit was not feasible as it would have raised the level of debt even higher and elevated the risks of a financial crisis.

如本章前文所述，中共制造了一个前所未有的信贷泡沫，该泡沫始于2009年，并在2023年达到了危险的规模。尽管习近平在2016年推行了去杠杆化运动，但收效甚微，并于2018年中期因中美贸易战而被迫中止。因此，泡沫膨胀至如此之大，以至于在2022年12月新冠疫情结束后，再次大规模注入信贷已不可行，因为这将进一步推高债务水平，并加剧金融危机的风险。

Similarly, the party relied too heavily on the real estate sector to drive growth during the early part of Xi's first term, as shown by the double-digit increase of investment in real estate from 2013 to 2015.102 Even after Xi grew concerned about the excessively high housing prices and ordered measures to cool down the sector in 2016, the party was unable to prevent a further expansion of the housing bubble. When the government finally ordered a crackdown in the summer of 2020, not only was the timing inauspicious (in the middle of the pandemic), but the cure also turned out to be too harsh. Instead of a soft landing, the crackdown precipitated a crash.

同样，在习近平第一任期初期，中共过度依赖房地产行业来推动经济增长，2013年至2015年房地产投资两位数的增长就证明了这一点。即使在习近平对过高的房价感到担忧，并在2016年下令采取措施给房地产行业降温之后，中共也未能阻止房地产泡沫的进一步膨胀。当政府最终在2020年夏季下令整顿房地产市场时，不仅时机不当（正值疫情期间），而且整顿措施也过于严厉。整顿非但没有带来软着陆，反而加速了经济的崩溃。

In addition to these policy mistakes, the Xi regime was less fortunate than its predecessors because most of the favorable structural factors that had earlier produced the Chinese economic miracle had either disappeared or become less favorable. The year that Xi ascended to the top, 2012, is likely to be remembered as China's "Lewis Turning Point"—an exhaustion in the supply of rural surplus labor.103 Rising labor costs made China less competitive in low-end manufacturing, and Chinese society was beginning to age rapidly, increasing healthcare and pension expenditures. Because the Hu regime did not privatize the inefficient SOEs or push through meaningful reforms to improve the overall efficiency of the economy, productivity growth was stalling, and it would completely collapse under Xi.

除了这些政策失误之外，习近平政权比其前任政权更加不幸，因为此前推动中国经济奇迹的大多数有利结构性因素要么已经消失，要么变得不再有利。习近平上台的2012年很可能被视为中国的“路易斯转折点”——农村剩余劳动力供给枯竭。劳动力成本上升导致中国在低端制造业的竞争力下降，同时中国社会开始快速老龄化，医疗和养老支出不断增加。由于胡锦涛政权没有对效率低下的国有企业进行私有化改革，也没有推进任何实质性的改革来提高经济的整体效率，生产率增长停滞不前，并在习近平执政期间彻底崩溃。

China's external environment became less favorable at the end of the Hu era mostly because of the country's increasing assertiveness in international affairs and Beijing's resistance to addressing the concerns of its Western trading partners about unfair trading practices. After Xi implemented an even more aggressive foreign policy during his first term, it became increasingly difficult for the West to sustain its decades-long policy of engagement. But it was Donald Trump's trade war in 2018 that marked the beginning of the end of China's economic integration with the West. As the Sino-American relationship turned progressively adversarial, the commercial relationship unraveled quickly. The trade war would escalate and morph into an economic cold war covering technology transfers and investments. However reluctant they were initially, after the Russian invasion of Ukraine in early 2022 America's allies in Europe and Japan fell in line and implemented measures to restrict the flow of technology to China and to actively pursue "derisking," or to reduce substantially their economic linkages with China. If globalization helped create the Chinese economic miracle, the reversal of globalization, which is certain to accelerate during the second Trump administration, will unavoidably weaken the Chinese economy and darken its prospects.

胡锦涛时代末期，中国的外部环境变得不利，这主要是因为中国在国际事务中日益强硬，以及北京拒绝解决西方贸易伙伴对不公平贸易行为的担忧。习近平在其第一个任期内实施了更为强硬的外交政策后，西方维持其数十年的接触政策变得越来越困难。但真正标志着中国与西方经济一体化走向终结的是2018年唐纳德·特朗普发起的贸易战。随着中美关系日益敌对，经贸关系迅速瓦解。贸易战不断升级，最终演变为一场涵盖技术转让和投资的经济冷战。尽管最初并不情愿，但在2022年初俄罗斯入侵乌克兰后，美国的欧洲和日本盟友最终还是屈服了，采取措施限制技术流向中国，并积极推行“去风险化”，即大幅削减与中国的经济联系。如果说全球化帮助创造了中国的经济奇迹，那么全球化的逆转（在特朗普第二任期内肯定会加速）将不可避免地削弱中国经济，并使其前景黯淡。





8 From Engagement to a New Cold War





8 从接触到新冷战


AS IS THE case with its domestic political developments, China's relations with the outside world, in particular the West, went through three distinct phases in the post-Mao period. Chinese power, the overall geopolitical environment, and the ideological values and leadership skills of the top leadership shaped Beijing's foreign policy and its ties with the West during each phase. Despite the substantive differences in Chinese foreign policy and its relations with the West in these three phases, the underlying logic of path dependence connects all of them. The prospects of engagement and even full integration with the West were the brightest in the 1980s when the possibility of a more open and free China was the greatest. Such prospects dimmed but did not disappear completely in the post-Tiananmen era, because of both the effectiveness of China's strategic restraint and the West's optimistic bet on globalization. But engagement became untenable once totalitarian rule was revived under Xi Jinping, as China started asserting its power and directly challenging the US-led order.

与国内政治发展一样，中国与外部世界，特别是与西方的关系，在后毛泽东时代经历了三个截然不同的阶段。在每个阶段，中国的实力、整体地缘政治环境以及最高领导层的意识形态价值观和领导能力都塑造了北京的外交政策及其与西方的关系。尽管中国外交政策及其与西方的关系在这三个阶段存在实质性差异，但路径依赖的内在逻辑将它们联系在一起。20世纪80年代，中国开放自由的可能性最大，与西方接触乃至全面融合的前景最为光明。天安门事件后，由于中国战略克制的有效性以及西方对全球化的乐观预期，这种前景有所减弱但并未完全消失。然而，随着习近平领导下极权统治的复兴，中国开始展现自身实力并直接挑战美国主导的国际秩序，这种接触变得难以维系。

The first phase, from 1979 to June 1989, was the "golden age" of relations between China and the West. Devastated by three decades of economic mismanagement and political chaos under Maoist rule, in 1979 China was an impoverished nation that posed no real military threat to the West. Geopolitically, both China and the West saw the Soviet Union as the primary security threat. Ideologically, Deng Xiaoping's pro-market reforms gained enthusiastic support in the West because his efforts represented a decisive break with communism. Despite Deng's avowed adherence to one-party rule, his regime presented an enticing opportunity to change China for the better and thus was worth a strategic bet.

第一阶段，即1979年至1989年6月，是中西方关系的“黄金时代”。1979年，中国经历了毛泽东统治下长达三十年的经济管理不善和政治混乱，经济衰退，对西方构不成真正的军事威胁。在地缘政治上，中西方都将苏联视为主要安全威胁。在意识形态上，邓小平的市场改革在西方获得了热烈支持，因为他的努力标志着与共产主义的决裂。尽管邓小平公开坚持一党专政，但他的政权为中国带来了改变的契机，因此值得西方进行战略押注。

A consummate pragmatist, Deng radically reoriented Chinese foreign policy to place it in the service of domestic economic development. By skillfully leveraging China's favorable geopolitical position, he cultivated friendly and economically beneficial ties with the United States and Japan, the two countries whose support would be indispensable to his "reform and opening." Although Deng's foreign policy would tie China's economic destiny to the West, he had no intention of becoming part of the West-led system. He viewed integration as the sole viable tactic for ensuring the party's survival and for restoring China to its place in the world. Steeped in geopolitical realism, Deng was convinced that only national strength could guarantee Chinese security and CCP rule. However, he believed that at the end of the Maoist era, China was not strong enough to safeguard either objective. If China succeeded in modernizing with the help of the West, in his view, the growth of Chinese power over time would improve the country's geopolitical position. Even though he was not explicitly thinking of confronting the West, Deng's grand strategy of building up strength with Western support and not being part of the West would sow seeds of conflict decades later, after his grand strategy had actually achieved its objective.

邓小平是一位务实的实干家，他彻底调整了中国的外交政策，使其服务于国内经济发展。他巧妙地利用中国有利的地缘政治位置，与美国和日本——这两个对他的“改革开放”至关重要的国家——建立了友好且互惠互利的经济关系。尽管邓小平的外交政策将中国的经济命运与西方紧密相连，但他无意成为西方主导体系的一部分。他认为融入西方是确保党的生存和恢复中国世界地位的唯一可行策略。深受地缘政治现实主义影响的邓小平坚信，只有国家实力才能保障中国的安全和中共的统治。然而，他认为在毛泽东时代末期，中国的实力不足以维护这两个目标。在他看来，如果中国在西方的帮助下成功实现现代化，随着时间的推移，中国国力的增长将提升中国的地缘政治地位。尽管邓小平并没有明确地考虑与西方对抗，但他依靠西方支持增强实力而不加入西方的宏伟战略，在几十年后，也就是他的宏伟战略实际上实现其目标之后，埋下了冲突的种子。

The crushing of the prodemocracy movement in June 1989 and the collapse of the Soviet Union in December 1991 fundamentally redefined Beijing's relations with the West and necessitated substantial adjustments to Chinese foreign policy. During the post-Tiananmen era, the two critical factors—China's status as a strategic partner of the West in an anti-Soviet common cause and muted ideological distaste for CCP autocratic rule—disappeared. The Tiananmen crackdown revealed the ideological chasm between China and the West, and it would make Chinese human rights a key issue for the West. Practically overnight, the end of the Cold War in 1991 downgraded China's geopolitical importance to the West.

1989年6月民主运动的镇压和1991年12月苏联的解体从根本上重塑了北京与西方的关系，并迫使中国外交政策做出重大调整。在后天安门时代，两个关键因素——中国作为西方在反苏共同事业中的战略伙伴的地位，以及西方对中共专制统治的意识形态上的淡漠——不复存在。天安门事件暴露了中西方之间的意识形态鸿沟，并使中国的人权问题成为西方关注的焦点。几乎在一夜之间，1991年冷战的结束降低了中国对西方的地缘政治重要性。

The West's sanctions against China following the Tiananmen crackdown and its triumph over the Soviet Union directly gave rise to a grim view of the emerging West-led world order in Beijing. If a bipolar world order in the 1980s served Chinese interests by allowing China ample space to maneuver between two opposing camps, a unipolar world order under American dominance was decidedly not in Chinese interests. It was in the early 1990s that Deng began to explicitly and consistently express opposition to the West-led order and to voice China's desire to change it. However, as China was too weak to challenge the post-Cold War order for most of the post-1989 era, its grand strategy was to avoid a self-defeating clash with the West, buy time, and build up strength to better protect its national interests.

天安门事件后西方对中国的制裁以及中国战胜苏联，直接导致北京对新兴的西方主导的世界秩序感到悲观。如果说20世纪80年代的两极世界秩序为中国提供了在两个对立阵营之间周旋的充足空间，符合中国的利益，那么美国主导的单极世界秩序则显然不符合中国的利益。20世纪90年代初，邓小平开始明确且持续地表达对西方主导秩序的反对，并表达了中国改变这一秩序的愿望。然而，由于在1989年后的绝大部分时间里，中国实力不足以挑战后冷战时代的秩序，其总体战略是避免与西方发生自取灭亡的冲突，争取时间，积蓄力量，以便更好地维护自身国家利益。

Despite incipient worries about growing Chinese power and constant tensions over its human rights record, the West adopted a policy of engagement with strategic hedging. Under this policy, economic and diplomatic engagement with China continued, with the implicit goal of integrating China into the post-Cold War order and becoming a stakeholder that would share the benefits of an inclusive order. At the same time, the United States would maintain a robust military presence and security alliances along China's periphery as insurance policies.

尽管西方对中国日益增长的实力以及其人权记录引发的持续紧张局势有所担忧，但西方仍采取了接触与战略对冲相结合的政策。在该政策下，西方继续与中国开展经济和外交接触，其隐含目标是将中国纳入后冷战时代的国际秩序，使其成为能够分享包容性秩序利益的利益攸关方。与此同时，美国则在中国周边地区维持强大的军事存在和安全联盟，作为一项保障措施。

Jiang Zemin implemented Deng's strategy effectively. Ironically, however, the very success of the policy, especially in gaining the time and space necessary to amass national power, also made conflict more likely. As China's growing clout boosted its leaders' confidence and ambitions, Deng's dictum on strategic caution gradually lost its power of restraint. The initial, albeit subtle, break with the post-Tiananmen foreign policy of strategic caution occurred under the leadership of Hu Jintao in the wake of the 2008 global financial crisis. Convinced that China could find the right balance between strategic caution and strategic activism, Hu and his colleagues embarked on a new course to probe the soft spots in the West-led order and test its response to Chinese actions.

江泽民有效地贯彻了邓小平的战略。然而，具有讽刺意味的是，这项政策的成功，尤其是在为积累国家实力争取时间和空间方面，也增加了冲突发生的可能性。随着中国日益增长的影响力增强了其领导人的信心和野心，邓小平关于战略谨慎的原则逐渐失去了约束力。在2008年全球金融危机之后，胡锦涛领导下的中国外交政策与天安门事件后奉行的战略谨慎政策出现了最初但较为微妙的决裂。胡锦涛及其同僚坚信中国能够在战略谨慎和战略积极之间找到合适的平衡点，于是他们开始探索西方主导的国际秩序中的薄弱环节，并试探其对中国行动的反应。

Although the initial abandonment of strategic caution occurred in the waning years of the Hu era, the rise of Xi Jinping at the end of 2012 marked a decisive break with China's post-Tiananmen grand strategy. To be sure, Deng's ultimate objectives of strategic caution—safeguarding one-party rule and restoring China's status as a great power—did not differ from those of Xi. But Xi misjudged Chinese strength, set overly ambitious objectives, embraced excessively risky and confrontational tactics, and underestimated the US resolve and response.

尽管战略谨慎原则的放弃最初发生在胡锦涛时代的末期，但习近平在2012年底的崛起标志着中国与后天安门时代大战略的决裂。诚然，邓小平战略谨慎原则的最终目标——维护一党专政、恢复中国大国地位——与习近平的目标并无二致。但习近平误判了中国的实力，设定了过于雄心勃勃的目标，采取了过于冒险和对抗性的策略，并且低估了美国的决心和反应。

Inspired mostly by domestic political considerations, the trade war Donald Trump launched in early 2018 quickly triggered a cascade of actions and reactions that in short order led to a complete rupture of Sino-American relations. As the confrontation between the two countries escalated, Xi made the fateful strategic decision to align with Russia to counter American power. But Russia's invasion of Ukraine in February 2022 drove the European nations, most of which probably would have preferred neutrality in the Sino-US conflict, into the arms of the United States.

2018年初，唐纳德·特朗普发起的贸易战主要出于国内政治考量，迅速引发了一系列连锁反应，并在短时间内导致中美关系彻底破裂。随着两国对抗升级，习近平做出了与俄罗斯结盟以对抗美国实力的重大战略决策。然而，2022年2月俄罗斯入侵乌克兰，迫使原本可能倾向于在中美冲突中保持中立的欧洲国家倒向了美国。

The outcome has been a full-fledged new cold war (NCW). Ideologically, China is aligned with the major autocratic regimes, such as Russia and Iran, which share its opposition to the US-led order that threatens Chinese regime security and its vital security interests. Economically, China and the West have begun a costly and complex process of severing the trade, technological, and financial ties that had been forged during the prior four decades of engagement. Militarily, the United States and China have accelerated preparations for a direct conflict in the Taiwan Strait and the South China Sea.

其结果是新冷战全面爆发。在意识形态上，中国与俄罗斯和伊朗等主要专制政权结盟，这些政权同样反对以美国为主导的、威胁中国政权安全及其重大安全利益的国际秩序。在经济上，中国和西方已经开始着手切断过去四十年间建立的贸易、技术和金融联系，而这一过程代价高昂且错综复杂。在军事上，中美两国加快了在台湾海峡和南海发生直接冲突的准备。





Birth of Engagement





订婚的诞生


When Mao died in September 1976, the dictator bequeathed to China a relatively favorable external environment following the Sino-American rapprochement that he and Richard Nixon had engineered in 1971-1972.1 By the time of his death, China and the United States were quasi-allies in their common cause against the Soviet Union. Beijing had reclaimed Chinese membership in the United Nations and held a veto-wielding permanent seat on its Security Council. China had also restored diplomatic relations with most Western countries. Although the Cold War would not end for another decade and a half, by the mid-1970s the cold war between China and the West was effectively over. For a country isolated from the capitalist world for nearly three decades, friendly relations with the economically dominant West was a precondition for its reintegration into the global economy and economic modernization.

1976年9月毛泽东逝世时，这位独裁者为中国留下了一个相对有利的外部环境。这得益于他与尼克松在1971-1972年间促成的中美关系缓和。在他逝世之时，中美两国在对抗苏联的共同事业中已成为准盟友。北京重新获得了联合国成员国资格，并在安理会拥有一个拥有否决权的常任理事国席位。中国也与大多数西方国家恢复了外交关系。尽管冷战还要持续十五年才会结束，但到20世纪70年代中期，中美之间的冷战实际上已经结束。对于一个与资本主义世界隔绝了近三十年的国家而言，与经济上占主导地位的西方建立友好关系是其重新融入全球经济和实现经济现代化的先决条件。

After Deng became de facto paramount leader in December 1978 and launched his "reform and opening," China's external environment would improve even more dramatically. The tensions between the Soviet Union and the West escalated after the former invaded Afghanistan at the end of 1979. Because Deng embarked on a path toward capitalism, the West had additional incentives to cultivate ties with China. The economic potential of a market of nearly one billion people was too enticing to ignore, despite China's low level of development. Ideologically, Deng's "reform and opening" was worth supporting because it represented a great leap forward from Mao's totalitarianism and could lead to more personal freedoms and even political openness.

1978年12月邓小平成为事实上的最高领导人并启动“改革开放”后，中国的外部环境将得到更加显著的改善。1979年底苏联入侵阿富汗后，苏联与西方之间的紧张关系加剧。由于邓小平走上了资本主义道路，西方更有动力与中国发展关系。尽管中国当时的发展水平较低，但拥有近十亿人口的市场所带来的经济潜力实在难以忽视。从意识形态上看，邓小平的“改革开放”值得支持，因为它标志着中国从毛泽东时代的极权主义向前迈出了一大步，并有可能带来更多的个人自由乃至政治开放。

Besides these favorable factors, Deng's positive assessment of China's external environment and near-total influence over foreign policy reinforced his determination to seize this historic opportunity to advance his agenda of "opening." In January 1980 he articulated the essence of his strategy of "biding your time and building your strength," even though he did not use these exact words in a talk to senior leaders. "Of all our tasks," Deng said, "modernization is . . . the essential condition for solving both our domestic and our external problems. . . . The role we play in international affairs is determined by the extent of our economic growth. If our country becomes more developed and prosperous, we will be in a position to play a greater role in international affairs. . . . In the final analysis, the return of Taiwan . . . depends on our running our affairs at home well."2

除了这些有利因素外，邓小平对中国外部环境的积极评估以及他对外交政策近乎完全的掌控，更加坚定了他抓住这一历史机遇、推进“对外开放”议程的决心。1980年1月，他阐述了“静待时机，积蓄力量”战略的精髓，尽管他在与高层领导人的谈话中并未直接使用这些措辞。邓小平说：“在我们所有的任务中，现代化……是解决我们国内外问题的根本条件……我们在国际事务中扮演的角色取决于我们经济增长的程度。如果我们的国家更加发达繁荣，我们就能够在国际事务中发挥更大的作用……归根结底，台湾的回归……取决于我们能否把国内事务处理好。”

However effusive he might have sounded about the importance of opening, Deng did not envision China becoming part of the West-led international order. He saw this order as something China could exploit profitably, but he said nothing about accepting the values and rules embodied in it. Indeed, Deng's opening was transactional and restricted primarily to economic relations. From his perspective, China would take advantage of the economic benefits of the West-led order but would remain independent of it in all other aspects.

尽管邓小平对开放的重要性表达了极大的热情，但他并未设想中国会融入西方主导的国际秩序。他认为中国可以从这一秩序中获利，但他从未表示会接受其中蕴含的价值观和规则。事实上，邓小平的开放是交易性的，主要局限于经济关系。在他看来，中国将利用西方主导的秩序带来的经济利益，但在其他所有方面都将保持独立。

For Deng's "developmental diplomacy" to succeed, he needed first to dramatically improve ties with the United States and Japan, the world's two largest economies, which could provide China with more access to capital, technology, and markets than any other country.3 Gaining the support of the United States as part of Deng's "reform and opening" was critical because the US stance on China could also influence the position of its allies. In the case of Japan, its geographic proximity to China made it an even more promising trading partner and investor than the United States. Therefore, Deng took personal charge of these two vital diplomatic tasks in 1978, even before he effectively became paramount leader in December of that year.

邓小平的“发展外交”要想取得成功，首先需要大幅改善与美国和日本这两个世界最大经济体的关系，因为这两个国家能够为中国提供比其他任何国家都多的资金、技术和市场。争取美国的支持是邓小平“改革开放”战略的关键组成部分，因为美国对华立场也会影响其盟友的立场。就日本而言，由于其地理位置靠近中国，因此比美国更有潜力成为中国的贸易伙伴和投资来源。因此，早在1978年12月正式成为最高领导人之前，邓小平就亲自负责这两项至关重要的外交任务。

Although the visit by Richard Nixon in February 1972 initiated the US-China strategic rapprochement, disagreement over the Taiwan issue prevented the two countries from normalizing diplomatic relations. The United States was seeking a form of normalization with the People's Republic of China without derecognizing the Republic of China (ROC), a position Beijing emphatically rejected. Washington and Beijing were essentially deadlocked over the Taiwan issue until late 1978, when President Jimmy Carter signaled that the United States could meet China's three conditions: severing official ties with the ROC, withdrawing US troops from Taiwan, and abrogating the US-ROC mutual defense treaty. At the most critical stage in the Sino-American normalization talks in mid-December 1978, Deng personally participated in the negotiations and made a key concession by tacitly agreeing to continued US arms sales to Taiwan despite his vocal opposition.4 On December 16 the United States and China released a joint communiqué announcing the normalization of diplomatic relations.5

尽管1972年2月尼克松访华开启了美中战略关系缓和的进程，但两国在台湾问题上的分歧阻碍了外交关系正常化。美国寻求在不否认中华民国（中华民国）的前提下，与中华民国实现关系正常化，而北京对此断然拒绝。华盛顿和北京在台湾问题上基本上陷入僵局，直到1978年底，美国总统吉米·卡特表示，美国可以满足中国提出的三个条件：断绝与中华民国的官方关系、从台湾撤军以及废除美中华民国共同防御条约。 1978年12月中旬，中美关系正常化谈判进入最关键阶段，邓小平亲自参与谈判，并做出了一项关键让步，尽管他曾公开反对，但最终还是默许了美国继续向台湾出售武器。12月16日，中美发表联合公报，宣布两国关系正常化。

To be sure, the United States and China did not resolve their fundamental differences over the status of Taiwan, but the "one China policy" that the United States formulated and later modified largely struck the right balance between reassuring Beijing and deterring reunification through military means. The Taiwan issue would become more complicated and more volatile in the 1990s after pro-independence political forces gained greater influence on the island, but in the 1980s China and the United States managed their differences over Taiwan skillfully and cooperatively.

诚然，中美两国并未就台湾地位问题达成根本共识，但美国制定并后经修改的“一个中国政策”在很大程度上平衡了安抚北京与以武力阻止统一之间的关系。20世纪90年代，随着台独势力在台湾岛内影响力的增强，台湾问题变得更加复杂和动荡，但在20世纪80年代，中美两国巧妙而合作地管控了在台湾问题上的分歧。

When the ink on the Sino-American communiqué normalizing relations was barely dry, Deng embarked on a weeklong historic visit to the United States at the end of January 1979 to cement the Sino-American partnership. In addition to specific agreements signed during his trip, Deng succeeded in winning over both the American political establishment and the American public with his style of straight talk and friendly gestures (including donning a cowboy hat during a rodeo in Houston).6

中美关系正常化联合公报墨迹未干，邓小平便于1979年1月底对美国展开为期一周的历史性访问，以巩固中美伙伴关系。除了访问期间签署的具体协议外，邓小平还以其直言不讳的风格和友好的姿态（包括在休斯顿观看牛仔竞技表演时戴上牛仔帽）成功赢得了美国政界和公众的认可。

Normalization of Sino-American relations in general, and Deng's successful visit to the United States in 1979 in particular, ushered in a golden era of relations between the two countries. Prior to normalization, their commercial relations were negligible, with two-way trade in 1978 totaling $1.1 billion.7 But by 1989 bilateral trade had risen to nearly $17 billion.8 The rapid expansion of trade was made possible because the United States granted China "most-favored-nation" (MFN) trade status following the "Agreement on Trade Relations between the United States of America and the People's Republic of China," which was signed in July 1979 and became effective on February 1, 1980. (China's MFN status was subject to annual renewal by the US president.)9

中美关系的正常化，尤其是邓小平1979年对美国的成功访问，开启了两国关系的黄金时代。在关系正常化之前，两国经贸关系微乎其微，1978年双边贸易额仅为11亿美元。但到1989年，双边贸易额已增长至近170亿美元。贸易的快速增长得益于美国根据1979年7月签署、1980年2月1日生效的《美利坚合众国与中华人民共和国贸易关系协定》给予中国“最惠国待遇”（MFN）。（中国的最惠国待遇需由美国总统每年续签。）

Cooperation in science and technology also blossomed after the January 31, 1979, signing of the US-China Agreement on Scientific and Technological Cooperation. Based on the agreement's framework, the two countries reached a series of separate deals covering specific areas, such as agriculture, civilian nuclear energy, and aerospace. The United States also significantly relaxed export controls and even allowed the export of defensive military technologies to China.10 Regular high-level exchanges further solidified the Sino-American partnership in the 1980s. Top American leaders paid frequent visits to China. In April 1984 President Ronald Reagan visited China after hosting Premier Zhao Ziyang three months earlier. George H. W. Bush made China a stop on his trip to East Asia in February 1989, shortly after becoming president. Frequent cabinet-level exchanges also took place between the two countries.11

1979年1月31日，中美签署了《中美科技合作协定》，此后，两国在科技领域的合作蓬勃发展。根据该协定的框架，两国在农业、民用核能和航空航天等领域达成了一系列具体协议。美国还大幅放宽了出口管制，甚至允许向中国出口国防军事技术。20世纪80年代，两国高层频繁互访进一步巩固了中美伙伴关系。美国高级领导人频繁访问中国。1984年4月，美国总统罗纳德·里根访问中国，此前三个月，他曾接待过赵紫阳总理。1989年2月，老布什总统就任后不久，访问东亚期间也访问了中国。两国还进行了频繁的内阁级互访。

China's relationship with Japan experienced rapid improvement during the same period. On October 22, 1978, Deng began a weeklong visit to Japan—the first visit by a top Chinese leader since 1949.12 Just as he would do a few months later in the United States, Deng won over Japanese political elites, business leaders, and the public alike with his straight talk, friendly demeanor, and diplomatic skills. He studiously avoided or downplayed the territorial dispute over the Senkaku/Diaoyu Islands, which both Japan and China claim.13 In December 1979 Prime Minister Masayoshi Ohira of Japan visited Beijing and announced a five-year loan program, totaling 370 billion yen ( $1.5 billion), to help fund the building of several major projects in China. In addition, Ohira offered preferential tariff treatment on Chinese goods, a grant to build a hospital in Beijing, and other technical assistance.14 In subsequent years, Japan's Official Development Assistance (ODA) program would channel valuable resources into China's economic development at a time when the country was desperately in need of foreign capital. Between 1979 and 2005, the amount of development assistance provided by Japan in concessional loans, grant aid, and technical assistance totaled 3.4 trillion yen (over $10 billion), more than that of any other country in the world.15 Japanese FDI in China in the 1980s reached $3.2 billion, accounting for about 15 percent of total FDI received by China, and second only to the amount of FDI from Hong Kong.16

同期，中日关系迅速改善。1978年10月22日，邓小平开始对日本进行为期一周的访问——这是自1949年以来中国最高领导人首次访问日本。正如几个月后他在美国所做的那样，邓小平凭借其直言不讳、友善的举止和外交手腕赢得了日本政界精英、商界领袖和民众的一致好评。他刻意回避或淡化了中日两国都声称拥有主权的尖阁诸岛/钓鱼岛领土争端。1979年12月，日本首相大平正义访问北京，宣布了一项为期五年、总额达3700亿日元（约合15亿美元）的贷款计划，用于资助中国多个重大项目的建设。此外，大平还提供了对中国商品的优惠关税待遇、在北京兴建医院的赠款以及其他技术援助。14 在随后的几年里，日本的官方发展援助（ODA）计划将宝贵的资源投入到中国经济发展中，当时中国急需外资。1979年至2005年间，日本提供的优惠贷款、赠款和技术援助总额达3.4万亿日元（超过100亿美元），超过世界上任何其他国家。15 20世纪80年代，日本对华直接投资达到32亿美元，约占中国吸引的外国直接投资总额的15%，仅次于香港对华直接投资。16

Diplomatic ties blossomed even more than Sino-Japanese commercial relations in the wake of Deng's visit. During his December 1979 trip to Beijing, Prime Minister Ohira signed a Sino-Japanese cultural exchange agreement. In March 1980 the first meeting of a regular Sino-Japanese diplomatic dialogue was held in Tokyo. Two months later, Chinese Premier Hua Guofeng visited Japan and signed a Sino-Japanese agreement on cooperation in science and technology. Sino-Japanese relations reached a new high following the visit by Hu Yaobang, then CCP general secretary, to Japan in November 1983. One of the highlights of Hu's visit was an agreement with Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone to form the Sino-Japanese Friendship Committee for the 21st Century, an organization whose sole mission was to improve bilateral relations.17 The warming of Sino-Japanese relations also led to an increase in people-to-people exchanges. During his visit to Japan in late 1983, Hu invited three thousand Japanese youths to spend a week in China the following year (the visit took place in September 1984). In March 1985 a delegation of two hundred Chinese young people, headed by future Chinese leader Hu Jintao, visited Japan at the invitation of the Japanese government.18

邓小平访日后，中日外交关系的发展甚至超过了经贸关系。1979年12月，大平首相访问北京期间，签署了中日文化交流协议。1980年3月，中日首次定期外交对话在东京举行。两个月后，中国总理华国锋访问日本，并签署了中日科技合作协议。1983年11月，时任中共中央总书记胡耀邦访日，中日关系达到新的高度。胡耀邦访日的一大亮点是与日本首相中曾根康弘达成协议，成立“21世纪中日友好委员会”，该委员会的唯一宗旨是促进双边关系。中日关系的升温也带动了两国人民交流的增加。 1983年底胡锦涛访问日本期间，邀请三千名日本青年于次年（1984年9月）赴华访问一周。1985年3月，应日本政府邀请，由未来的中国领导人胡锦涛率领的两百名中国青年代表团访问日本。

Reintegration into the international community was another foreign policy goal in the 1980s. During the Maoist era, self-isolation had led to the exclusion of China from nearly all key international organizations. In 1977 China was a member of only twenty-one international organizations.19 This would change immediately after Deng became paramount leader. In 1979 China would join most of the UN-affiliated international organizations, such as UNDP, UNICEF, UNHCR, and WEP, and in the 1980s it would become a member of the rest, such as FO and ILO.20 China also joined a large number of international nongovernmental organizations.21

20世纪80年代，重新融入国际社会是中国外交政策的另一项目标。毛泽东时代，中国实行孤立主义，几乎被排除在所有重要的国际组织之外。1977年，中国仅是21个国际组织的成员。邓小平成为最高领导人后，这种情况立即发生了改变。1979年，中国加入了大多数联合国附属国际组织，例如联合国开发计划署（UNDP）、联合国儿童基金会（UNICEF）、联合国难民署（UNHCR）和世界经济伙伴关系组织（WEP）；20世纪80年代，中国又加入了其他一些组织，例如联合国外交关系委员会（FO）和国际劳工组织（ILO）。此外，中国还加入了大量国际非政府组织。

For a leadership laser-focused on economic development, membership in international economic institutions promised to deliver immense benefits. In April 1980 China became a member of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank. Six years later, it joined the Asian Development Bank and also applied to join the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), the predecessor of the World Trade Organization. Of these international financial institutions, the World Bank was the source of the most valuable assistance to China in the 1980s. Besides lending close to $7 billion to China during the entire decade, the World Bank's technical expertise in economic development and reform helped Chinese technocrats craft more effective policies.22

对于一个将经济发展作为核心的领导层而言，加入国际经济机构无疑会带来巨大的益处。1980年4月，中国成为国际货币基金组织（IMF）和世界银行的成员国。六年之后，中国又加入了亚洲开发银行，并申请加入关税及贸易总协定（GATT），即世界贸易组织的前身。在这些国际金融机构中，世界银行在20世纪80年代为中国提供了最宝贵的援助。除了在整个80年代向中国提供近70亿美元的贷款外，世界银行在经济发展和改革方面的技术专长也帮助中国技术官僚制定了更有效的政策。

Another of Deng's priorities was to send a large number of Chinese students abroad for higher education and advanced training. The country's higher education system, devastated during the Cultural Revolution, was unable to produce the scientists and engineers China urgently needed for economic development. Among top Chinese leaders, Deng was the most enthusiastic advocate for broadening educational exchanges with the West.23 Western educational institutions and foundations, in particular those in the United States, offered generous funding to Chinese students as most Chinese students could not afford the tuition and living expenses in the West. The number of Chinese students grew rapidly. At the end of the Maoist era, few Chinese students were studying abroad. But by 1988, the United States alone was hosting more than twenty-eight thousand Chinese students and scholars.24 This trickle would grow into a flood in later years as China opened its doors wider and well-to-do Chinese could afford to send their children abroad to study at their own expense. Official Chinese data show that about eight million Chinese students and researchers studied in more than 160 countries between 1979 and 2021.25 The benefits to China's economic modernization generated by this infusion of human capital are incalculable.

邓小平的另一项优先事项是派遣大量中国学生出国深造和接受高级培训。中国高等教育体系在文化大革命期间遭到严重破坏，无法培养中国经济发展急需的科学家和工程师。在中国最高领导人中，邓小平是最热衷于扩大与西方教育交流的倡导者。西方教育机构和基金会，特别是美国的机构和基金会，为中国学生提供了慷慨的资助，因为大多数中国学生无力承担在西方的学费和生活费。中国留学生人数迅速增长。毛泽东时代末期，出国留学的中国学生寥寥无几。但到1988年，仅美国就接纳了超过2.8万名中国留学生和学者。随着中国进一步开放，富裕的中国人有能力自费送子女出国留学，这股中国留学生的涓涓细流在后来的几年里汇成滔滔洪流。中国官方数据显示，1979年至2021年间，约有800万中国学生和研究人员在160多个国家学习和学习。25 人力资本的注入给中国经济现代化带来的益处是无法估量的。





Crafting a New Grand Strategy





制定新的大战略


In the 1980s Deng accomplished most of his priority foreign policy objectives. The normalization of relations with the United States opened access to American capital and technology as well as the US market. Washington's embrace of Deng's "reform and opening" encouraged its allies to adopt similar friendly policies toward Beijing. A relationship of quasi-alliance between the United States and China was also forged during this decade, resulting in frequent high-level visits and close cooperation in national security, education, science and technology, and commerce. China's relationship with its most important Asian neighbor, Japan, reached an unprecedented level of warmth and delivered rich economic benefits to Deng's modernization program. In the rest of Asia, with the exception of Vietnam, China could boast friendly, or vastly improved, ties. Most remarkably, China and the Soviet Union, its primary geopolitical adversary since the late 1960s, had reached a rapprochement. Beginning in late 1982, both Moscow and Beijing began to explore a path forward to lower tensions. The initial pace was slow, but when Mikhail Gorbachev became Soviet leader in March 1985, he immediately expressed greater openness to repairing Soviet-Chinese ties, and he later followed up with a series of unilateral concessions that Beijing positively received.26 The event marking full normalization of bilateral state relations was Gorbachev's summit with Deng, held in Beijing on May 16, 1989.

20世纪80年代，邓小平实现了其外交政策的大部分优先目标。中美关系正常化使中国得以获得美国资本和技术，并进入美国市场。华盛顿对邓小平“改革开放”的拥护，鼓励其盟友对北京采取类似的友好政策。中美之间也在这一时期建立了准联盟关系，促成了频繁的高层互访，并在国家安全、教育、科技和商业等领域开展密切合作。中国与其最重要的亚洲邻国日本的关系达到了前所未有的高度，并为邓小平的现代化计划带来了丰厚的经济利益。除越南外，中国与亚洲其他地区的关系也十分友好，或显著改善。尤其值得一提的是，自20世纪60年代末以来一直是中国主要地缘政治对手的苏联，也实现了关系缓和。从1982年末开始，莫斯科和北京都开始探索降低紧张局势的途径。初期进展缓慢，但1985年3月米哈伊尔·戈尔巴乔夫就任苏联领导人后，立即表示对修复苏中关系持更加开放的态度，随后又做出了一系列单方面让步，北京方面对此表示欢迎。标志着双边国家关系全面正常化的事件是1989年5月16日戈尔巴乔夫与邓小平在北京举行的峰会。

This "golden era" was cut short on June 4, 1989, when Deng ordered the PLA to crush the prodemocracy movement in Tiananmen Square. Just as the Tiananmen crackdown irrevocably altered China's domestic political trajectory in the post-Mao era, it had a comparable impact on relations with the West, and it exposed the previously somewhat hidden but unbridgeable ideological chasm between China's Leninist regime and the Western democracies that would become a major source of friction in the post-Tiananmen era. Before the tanks of the PLA rolled into Tiananmen Square, China's human rights record was a troubling, but not dominant, issue for the West. Confronting the existential security threat of the Soviet Union took precedence. Additionally, largely due to the policies of liberal reformers like Hu Yaobang and Zhao Ziyang, China's human rights conditions were improving substantially in the 1980s, despite periodic but short-lived conservative backlashes in the ideological arena.

1989年6月4日，邓小平下令解放军镇压天安门广场的民主运动，中国“黄金时代”戛然而止。正如天安门事件不可逆转地改变了后毛泽东时代中国的国内政治走向一样，它也对中西方关系产生了类似的影响，并暴露了中国列宁主义政权与西方民主国家之间此前虽已隐蔽但却无法逾越的意识形态鸿沟，而这在后天安门时代将成为中西方摩擦的主要根源。在解放军坦克开进天安门广场之前，中国的人权状况对西方而言虽令人担忧，但并非主要问题。应对苏联带来的生存安全威胁才是当务之急。此外，尽管在意识形态领域不时出现短暂的保守主义反弹，但由于胡耀邦和赵紫阳等自由派改革者的政策，中国的人权状况在20世纪80年代已显著改善。

But all this changed after June 4, 1989. Although Deng was directly responsible for the Tiananmen crackdown, the paramount leader himself was infuriated by the sanctions imposed by the United States and its allies, and his attitude toward the West underwent a profound change. Prior to the Tiananmen crackdown, Deng consistently emphasized the West's indispensable role in Chinese economic modernization, and he downplayed its potential ideological threat to CCP rule. But after June 4, Deng saw the West as an implacable ideological adversary. The phrase "peaceful evolution," party shorthand for the West's plot to subvert the Chinese regime through economic and political engagement, never appeared in any of his speeches prior to June 1989. Indeed, it was seldom used in official publications. A search of China National Knowledge Infrastructure (CNKI) shows that the phrase appeared only twelve times between January 1, 1979, and April 20, 1989 (the Tiananmen protests began on April 15). But it ominously resurfaced in Deng's speech in September 1989.27 Apparently to underscore Deng's warning, the compilers of his Selected Works titled a conversation between Deng and a visiting foreign leader in November 1989 "We Must Adhere to Socialism and Prevent Peaceful Evolution Towards Capitalism."28 (The frequency of the appearance of the term "peaceful evolution" rose dramatically after June 4. A search of this phrase on CNKI shows that it appeared 2,889 times in official journals between June 5, 1989, and December 1, 1999.)

但这一切在1989年6月4日之后发生了改变。尽管邓小平直接下令镇压天安门事件，但这位最高领导人本人却对美国及其盟友实施的制裁感到愤怒，他对西方的态度也发生了深刻的转变。在天安门事件之前，邓小平一直强调西方在中国经济现代化进程中不可或缺的作用，并淡化了西方对中共统治可能构成的意识形态威胁。但6月4日之后，邓小平将西方视为不共戴天的意识形态对手。“和平演进”一词——中共用来指代西方企图通过经济和政治接触颠覆中国政权的委婉说法——在1989年6月之前从未出现在他的任何讲话中。事实上，在官方出版物中也鲜少出现这个词。中国知网（CNKI）的检索结果显示，从1979年1月1日至1989年4月20日（天安门事件始于4月15日），“和平演进”一词仅出现过12次。但它却在邓小平1989年9月的讲话中再次出现，令人感到不安。27 显然是为了强调邓小平的警告，《邓小平选集》的编者将邓小平1989年11月与一位来访外国领导人的谈话命名为《我们必须坚持社会主义，防止向资本主义和平演进》。28 （“和平演进”一词在6月4日之后出现的频率急剧上升。在CNKI上检索该词组显示，从1989年6月5日至1999年12月1日，该词组在官方期刊中出现了2889次。）

If anything, by late 1989, as the Soviet bloc was teetering on a complete meltdown, Deng had grounds to suspect that China would be the next target of the NCW. Indeed, he openly sounded the warning of an NCW shortly after the fall of the Berlin War in November 1989: "It seems that one Cold War has come to an end," Deng warned, "but that two others have already begun: One is being waged against all countries of the South and the Third World, and the other against socialism. The Western countries . . . want to bring about the peaceful evolution of the socialist countries."29

如果说有什么迹象表明这一点，那就是到了1989年末，随着苏联集团濒临崩溃，邓小平有理由怀疑中国将成为冷战的下一个目标。事实上，在1989年11月柏林战争结束后不久，他就公开发出了冷战的警告：“一场冷战似乎结束了，”邓小平警告说，“但另外两场冷战已经开始了：一场是针对所有南方国家和第三世界国家的，另一场是针对社会主义国家的。西方国家……想要促成社会主义国家的和平转型。”

However, despite his dim view of the West's intentions and the danger of "peaceful evolution," Deng remained convinced that a major new war was unlikely and believed that China needed to gain as much time as possible to make itself stronger. To be sure, he saw the post-Cold War international order, centering on American unipolarity ("hegemonism and great power politics" in Chinese official rhetoric), as fundamentally unjust, hence something that had to be changed. But he was also realistic enough to know that China lacked the power to make such a change happen, and any attempt to do so would be against Chinese interests.30

然而，尽管邓小平对西方的意图以及“和平演进”的危险性持悲观态度，但他仍然坚信爆发大规模新战争的可能性不大，并认为中国需要尽可能争取时间来增强自身实力。诚然，他认为以美国单极世界（中国官方称之为“霸权主义和大国政治”）为中心的后冷战国际秩序从根本上来说是不公正的，因此必须改变。但他同时也足够现实地认识到，中国缺乏实现这种改变的能力，任何试图改变现状的举动都将损害中国的利益。

In a series of speeches to top party leaders between late 1989 and the end of 1990, Deng spelled out the core tenets of a new grand strategy for the post-Cold War era. China's long-term strategic mission and objective would include "opposing hegemonism and power politics" and "working to establish a new international political order and a new international economic order."31 At the same time, despite the upheaval in some socialist countries, Deng still saw the possibility of China doubling its GNP in real terms for the second time, according to plan.32

在1989年末至1990年末的一系列面向党内高层领导人的讲话中，邓小平阐述了后冷战时代新大战略的核心原则。中国的长期战略使命和目标包括“反对霸权主义和强权政治”以及“致力于建立新的国际政治秩序和新的国际经济秩序”。与此同时，尽管一些社会主义国家动荡不安，邓小平仍然认为中国有可能按照计划实现国民生产总值实际翻番。

In September 1989 he coined three phrases, consisting of twelve Chinese characters that would become the guiding principle of Chinese foreign policy in the post-Tiananmen era. Translated as "Observe the situation coolly, hold our ground, and act calmly," this policy was cautious, reactive, and centered on self-preservation. In December 1990 Deng added another element: "Make a contribution."33

1989年9月，他提出了三个短语，共十二个汉字，这三个短语后来成为后天安门时代中国外交政策的指导原则。这三个短语翻译过来就是“冷静观察形势，坚守阵地，沉着应对”，其政策谨慎、被动，以自保为中心。1990年12月，邓小平又增加了一个要素：“做出贡献”。

Deng was making it crystal clear that the goal of this risk-averse foreign policy was to gain time to build up strength, as summarized by the phrase taoguang yanhui (hiding your brightness and building up strength), which Deng invoked in April 1992. The aging leader, who had just returned from his history-bending southern tour, told his staff, "We will become a more significant political power if only we taoguang yanhui for a few years. The weight of China's voice on the global stage will be different."34 A consummate realist, Deng knew that a successful strategy of taoguang yanhui would nevertheless instill anxiety about Chinese power in the West. The best response Deng prescribed was not open confrontation but rather maintaining cooperation, accompanied, at the same time, by vigilance. Despite the West's suspicions or nefarious design for China, Deng urged his successors to avoid conflict. "We should keep them as friends but also have a clear understanding of what they are doing."35

邓小平明确表示，这种规避风险的外交政策的目标是争取时间积蓄力量，正如他在1992年4月提出的“拖光积强”策略所概括的那样。这位刚刚结束改变历史的南方之行的老领导人告诉他的幕僚：“如果我们拖光积强几年，我们就能成为一个更加重要的政治力量。中国在国际舞台上的声音也会有所不同。”作为一位务实的现实主义者，邓小平深知，即使拖光积强策略成功，也必然会在西方引发对中国实力的担忧。邓小平提出的最佳应对措施并非公开对抗，而是在保持合作的同时保持警惕。尽管西方对中国抱有疑虑或别有用心，邓小平仍然敦促他的继任者避免冲突。 “我们应该和他们保持朋友关系，但也要清楚地了解他们在做什么。”

Although Deng presciently laid out the core principles of a foreign policy for the post-Cold War era two years prior to the fall of the Soviet Union, the formal dissolution of the world's erstwhile superpower on December 25, 1991, nevertheless demoralized and worried the Chinese leadership. Ideologically, the fall of the first Communist state, which had inspired the CCP, was yet another confirmation, after the collapse of the Soviet satellites in Eastern Europe in late 1989, that communism had been a complete failure. Geopolitically, China's position drastically worsened overnight. The favorable external environment of the 1980s became history. Conflict over security issues that had largely been frozen but not resolved, such as the status and future of Taiwan and Chinese territorial and maritime disputes with its neighbors, would become far more prominent and, like human rights issues, constitute a major source of tensions between China and the United States in the post-Cold War decades. As its capabilities grew, China's long-term intentions would soon become a top concern of both the United States and its allies. Deng's premonitions about the dynamic of a classical security dilemma would come true, albeit probably later than he had expected. Growing Chinese power did raise the specter of the rise of another Communist behemoth when America's neocons gained power in the administration of George W. Bush in 2001, but their strategic blunder of invading Iraq in 2003 would give China fifteen more years—until Donald Trump launched the 2018 trade war that formally ended the era of engagement between China and the United States.

尽管邓小平在苏联解体两年前就极具远见地阐述了后冷战时代外交政策的核心原则，但1991年12月25日，这个昔日世界超级大国的正式解体仍然令中国领导层士气低落，忧心忡忡。从意识形态上看，作为中共精神的启蒙国家，苏联的垮台，继1989年底苏联在东欧的卫星国解体之后，再次印证了共产主义的彻底失败。从地缘政治上看，中国的处境一夜之间急剧恶化。20世纪80年代有利的外部环境已成为历史。此前大多被冻结但并未得到解决的安全问题，例如台湾的地位和未来，以及中国与其邻国之间的领土和海洋争端，将变得更加突出，并像人权问题一样，成为后冷战时期中美关系紧张的主要根源。随着中国实力的增长，其长远意图很快成为美国及其盟友最为关注的问题。邓小平关于经典安全困境动态的预言最终成真，尽管可能比他预想的要晚一些。2001年，随着美国新保守主义者在小布什政府掌权，中国日益增长的实力确实引发了人们对另一个共产主义庞然大物崛起的担忧，但他们在2003年入侵伊拉克的战略失误却让中国又获得了十五年的发展空间——直到2018年特朗普发动贸易战，正式终结了中美之间的接触时代。

It is not an exaggeration to say that the seeds of the NCW between China and the West that had been sown even before the Cold War was completely over. Given the ideological chasm and clashing visions of the international order, Deng had made it clear that China would never give up its autonomy as a "socialist country" in international affairs. Speaking to several leading members of the Central Committee shortly after the Tiananmen crackdown, Deng vowed: "The Western imperialists are trying to make all socialist countries abandon the socialist road, to bring them in the end under the rule of international monopoly capital. . . . We have to take a clear-cut stand against this adverse current. Because if we did not uphold socialism we would eventually become, at best, a dependency of other countries."36 Deng might not have been aware of his tone at the time, but he was sounding a lot more like Chen Yun. More seriously, Deng's pledge that China would never become part of the West-dominated international system foreshadowed not only future Chinese leaders' resistance to full integration as encouraged by the West through engagement but also the likely clash with this order after China gains sufficient power.

毫不夸张地说，中西之间“新中国战争”的种子早在冷战彻底结束之前就已经埋下。鉴于意识形态上的鸿沟和国际秩序理念的冲突，邓小平明确表示，中国在国际事务中绝不会放弃“社会主义国家”的自主权。在天安门事件后不久，邓小平在与几位中央委员会高级委员的谈话中誓言：“西方帝国主义企图让所有社会主义国家放弃社会主义道路，最终使它们落入国际垄断资本的统治之下……我们必须坚决抵制这种逆流。因为如果我们不坚持社会主义，最终充其量也只能沦为其他国家的附庸。”邓小平当时或许并未意识到自己的语气，但他的言论听起来更像是陈云。更严重的是，邓小平承诺中国永远不会成为西方主导的国际体系的一部分，这不仅预示着未来的中国领导人会抵制西方通过接触所鼓励的全面融合，而且预示着中国获得足够实力后可能会与这一秩序发生冲突。





Biding Time and Building Strength





拖延时间，积蓄力量


Deng may have laid down the broad foreign policy principles for his successors, but translating them into policy was still a challenge in a unipolar world. With a GDP that was about 7.5 percent that of the United States in dollar terms (1992), China was a much weaker power, and it was highly vulnerable to hostile American actions.37 Geopolitically, the "China card" was no longer valuable.38 Ideologically, America's view of China darkened following the Tiananmen crackdown. Bilateral conflict over human rights became a major source of tensions in the 1990s. When Bill Clinton was running for the White House in 1992, he accused his opponent, then-president George H. W. Bush, of "coddling with dictators," and he later pledged to link China's MFN trade status to its human rights record (a policy he had to reverse in 1994).39

邓小平或许为他的继任者奠定了外交政策的总体原则，但在单极世界中，将这些原则转化为具体政策仍然是一项挑战。1992年，中国的GDP按美元计算约为美国的7.5%，实力远逊于美国，极易受到美国敌对行动的影响。地缘政治上，“中国牌”已不再具有价值。意识形态上，天安门事件后，美国对中国的看法变得更加负面。20世纪90年代，两国在人权问题上的冲突成为紧张局势的主要根源。1992年，比尔·克林顿竞选总统时，指责他的对手、时任总统乔治·H·W·布什“纵容独裁者”，后来他还承诺将中国的最惠国待遇与其人权记录挂钩（但这一政策在1994年不得不被撤销）。

Most ominously for the post-Deng leadership, powerful groups in the United States, encompassing labor and human rights advocates on the left and national security hawks and the religious right at the other end of the ideological spectrum, all viewed China as an enemy that had to be confronted before it grew too powerful.40

对后邓小平时代的美国领导层而言，最不祥的是，美国国内一些强大的团体，包括左翼的劳工和人权倡导者，以及意识形态光谱另一端的国家安全鹰派和宗教右翼，都将中国视为必须在其变得过于强大之前予以遏制的敌人。

Influential media figures as well as some academics eloquently made the case for containing China. A common thread ran through their warnings about China: The United States and China have irreconcilable ideological differences and clashing geopolitical interests, and should China gain enough power, conflict between the two countries will become inevitable.41

一些有影响力的媒体人士和学者雄辩地论证了遏制中国的必要性。他们对中国的警告中贯穿着一个共同的主题：美国和中国存在不可调和的意识形态分歧和地缘政治利益冲突，如果中国获得足够的实力，两国之间的冲突将不可避免。

Such calls for a preemptive containment strategy may seem prescient in hindsight, but they did not become American policy in the 1990s, most likely because there was no broad-based support for an offensive policy against a country whose rapid rise was hardly guaranteed. Indeed, few in Washington, or in China itself, foresaw the supercharged growth of Chinese power in the subsequent two decades that would turn Beijing into a near-peer rival. Those advocating an alternative strategy could also muster powerful counterarguments. Among other things, critics of a preemptive containment strategy pointed to the near certainty of an otherwise avoidable dangerous clash between the United States and China, the lack of support from allies in the event of such a conflict, and the weakness of Chinese power and an exaggeration of its threat to American interests in East Asia.42 The framework of such an alternative strategy has since been given various labels, such as "conditional engagement" or "strategic hedging." Its essence is a finely balanced strategy mixing deterrence and engagement. Specifically, instead of hard containment, Washington would place greater emphasis on economic and diplomatic engagement with Beijing through expansion of trade and investment and high-level exchanges. However, to hedge against potential Chinese threats to American interests in East Asia, the United States would maintain and strengthen its alliance networks, continue forward military deployment, and impose restrictions on transfers of advanced technologies (such as semiconductors) to China.43 The evolution of this strategy took some time and did not garner sufficient political support in Washington until bilateral relations were stabilized with Jiang Zemin's 1997 state visit to the United States.44

事后看来，这种先发制人的遏制战略的呼吁或许颇具先见之明，但在上世纪90年代，它并未成为美国的政策，很可能是因为当时并没有广泛的支持来对抗一个迅速崛起且几乎无法保证的国家。事实上，无论是华盛顿还是中国自身，都很少有人预料到中国在接下来的二十年里会以惊人的速度发展，最终使北京成为几乎势均力敌的对手。那些倡导替代战略的人也提出了强有力的反驳论点。除其他外，先发制人遏制战略的批评者指出，美中之间几乎必然会发生一场原本可以避免的危险冲突，一旦发生冲突，盟友将缺乏支持，而且中国实力较弱，其对美国在东亚利益的威胁也被夸大了。这种替代战略的框架后来被赋予了各种名称，例如“有条件接触”或“战略对冲”。其本质是一种巧妙平衡的战略，融合了威慑和接触。具体而言，华盛顿不再采取强硬遏制政策，而是更加重视通过扩大贸易投资和高层交流来加强与北京的经济和外交接触。然而，为了防范中国对美国在东亚利益的潜在威胁，美国将维持并加强其联盟网络，继续前沿部署军事力量，并限制向中国转让先进技术（例如半导体）。这一战略的演变历经一段时间，直到1997年江泽民对美国进行国事访问，双边关系趋于稳定后，才在华盛顿获得足够的政治支持。

To the post-Deng leaders, America's "strategic hedging" was preferable to full-fledged containment. But at the same time, they were not blind to its components that smacked of "containment." In a foreign policy speech in 1993, Jiang Zemin laid out the dilemma China faced in dealing with the United States. On the one hand, he pointed out that "peaceful evolution" remained the long-term goal of "some Americans" who did not want to see a stronger reunified China and would continue to pressure China on human rights, trade, and Taiwan. On the other hand, the United States was the world's most powerful country, an important export market, and a source of capital and technology for China. The best strategy was to be "both combative and conciliatory, . . . improving relations between China and the U.S. . . . to put our relations on a more stable course."45

对于邓小平之后的领导人而言，美国的“战略对冲”比全面遏制更为可取。但与此同时，他们也并非对其中带有“遏制”色彩的成分视而不见。1993年，江泽民在一次外交政策演讲中阐述了中国在对美关系中面临的困境。一方面，他指出，“和平演进”仍然是“一些美国人”的长期目标，这些人不希望看到一个更加强大的统一中国，并将继续在人权、贸易和台湾问题上向中国施压。另一方面，美国是世界上最强大的国家，是中国重要的出口市场，也是中国资金和技术的来源地。最佳策略是“兼具对抗性和和解性……改善中美关系……使我们的关系走上更加稳定的轨道”。

Even after Sino-American relations had fully stabilized in 1998 after a rocky period, Jiang made a similar warning in a speech. He said there are people in America whose "underlying goal is . . . to change China's socialist system and eventually incorporate China into the Western capitalist system. This is a long and complex struggle."46 In the face of this challenge, the best counterstrategy was "to use a two-pronged approach against their two-sided policy." America's "two sides" here obviously refer to engagement (one side) and containment (the other side). China's counterstrategy in response, according to Jiang, was both to "cooperate" (one side) and "confront" (the other side) by "adhering to principles without losing flexibility."47

即使在1998年中美关系经历了一段动荡时期后完全稳定下来之后，江泽民在一次讲话中也发出了类似的警告。他说，美国有些人“其根本目标是……改变中国的社会主义制度，最终将中国纳入西方资本主义制度。这是一场漫长而复杂的斗争。”面对这一挑战，最佳应对策略是“对美国的两面派政策采取双管齐下的策略”。美国的“两面派”显然指的是接触（一方面）和遏制（另一方面）。江泽民认为，中国的应对策略是“坚持原则，不失灵活性”，既要“合作”（一方面），也要“对抗”（另一方面）。

To be sure, this pragmatic strategy was designed to avoid a frontal collision from a position of structural vulnerability with the world's sole superpower in the post-Cold War era. By the 1990s, China had grown significantly dependent on access to the US market and American technologies, and a sudden rupture of ties with the United States could derail economic modernization.48 However difficult it might have been for Jiang and his colleagues to endure what they saw as bullying acts of "American hegemonism," the harsh reality of a lopsided balance of power unfavorable to China counseled prudence and patience.49 In the same speech, Jiang made it clear that Beijing desired a multipolar world and a new "just and equitable new international political and economic order."50 It was a refrain that Chinese leaders would invoke repeatedly, even at the risk of antagonizing the United States, the architect and primary defender of the order that China viewed as unjust and unreasonable. Nevertheless, Jiang emphasized that China had to act with calm and avoid taking the lead to confront the United States and its allies. Repeating Deng's dictum of taoguang yanhui, he added three additional strategic principles: shoulian fengmang (exercise restraint), baocun ziji (preserve ourselves), and xutu fazhan (develop gradually).51 In essence, Jiang was prescribing Deng's strategy of buying time and avoiding conflict to cope with American dominance in the post-Cold War era.

可以肯定的是，这一务实的战略旨在避免在后冷战时代，从结构脆弱的位置与世界唯一的超级大国发生正面冲突。到了20世纪90年代，中国对美国市场和技术的依赖程度日益加深，与美国关系的突然破裂可能会阻碍经济现代化进程。尽管江泽民及其同僚难以忍受他们眼中的“美国霸权主义”的欺凌行为，但对中国不利的权力失衡的残酷现实迫使他们保持谨慎和耐心。在同一次讲话中，江泽民明确表示，北京渴望建立一个多极世界和一个“公正公平的国际政治经济新秩序”。这句口号被中国领导人反复提及，即便冒着激怒美国的风险——美国正是中国眼中不公正、不合理的秩序的缔造者和主要捍卫者。然而，江泽民强调，中国必须保持冷静，避免率先与美国及其盟友对抗。他重申了邓小平“道光延汇”的原则，并补充了三个战略原则：守廉风莽、保村自基、步走发站。本质上，江泽民是在沿用邓小平争取时间、避免冲突的战略，以应对后冷战时代美国的主导地位。





Reorienting Security Strategy





重新调整安全战略


In the 1980s Deng's assessment that a great power war was unlikely led to a cut of one million PLA soldiers and the starving of the military of funding and investments. But the party's prioritization of butter over guns created its own problems, such as corruption in the military as the PLA was allowed to operate for-profit businesses to generate off-the-books income (a practice the party ended in 1998).52 In the 1990s China also began to implement a sustained program of modernizing its outdated military. The impetus was not a sudden change in its assessment of the likelihood of a world war. In fact, during his tenure in office, Jiang Zemin consistently maintained that the external environment was favorable and a new world war was unlikely.53 Instead, the initial direct trigger for Chinese military modernization in the post-Cold War era was the awesome demonstration of America's high-tech military during the first Gulf War of 1990-1991, when a US-led coalition routed the Iraqi army. Jiang personally attended three seminars on the Gulf War in June 1991, and thereafter he gave a series of speeches on military strategy and technology that underscored the need to increase defense "appropriately" and to develop indigenous defense technologies.54 After intense deliberations, the Central Military Commission formulated a new defense doctrine in 1993 that emphasized "winning local wars under modern technological conditions."55 Implementation of this doctrine would drive military modernization during the following two decades.

20世纪80年代，邓小平认为大国战争不太可能爆发，导致解放军裁减了一百万士兵，并削减了军队的经费和投资。但中共优先发展军民两方面的政策也带来了自身的问题，例如军队内部的腐败，因为解放军被允许经营营利性企业以获取账外收入（这一做法在1998年被中共终止）。20世纪90年代，中国也开始实施一项持续的军队现代化计划。推动这一计划的并非是对世界大战可能性评估的突然转变。事实上，江泽民在任期间始终坚持认为外部环境有利，爆发新一轮世界大战的可能性不大。53 然而，冷战后中国军事现代化的直接导火索是1990-1991年第一次海湾战争中美国高科技军事力量的惊人展现，当时以美国为首的联军击溃了伊拉克军队。江泽民于1991年6月亲自参加了三次海湾战争研讨会，此后发表了一系列关于军事战略和技术的讲话，强调需要“适当”加强国防建设，发展自主国防技术。54 经过深入讨论，中央军委于1993年制定了新的国防理论，强调“在现代技术条件下打赢局部战争”。55 这一理论的实施推动了此后二十年的军事现代化进程。

The task of building a high-tech military force gained greater urgency after the ascendance of pro-independence political forces in Taiwan in the mid-1990s. Chinese leaders realized that they required credible military options to deter both Taiwanese independence and potential American military intervention. Starting in the mid-1990s, China's military modernization program focused largely on possible Taiwan contingencies, thus unleashing the dynamics of an escalating security dilemma with the United States and its East Asian ally, Japan, in the subsequent two decades.56

20世纪90年代中期台湾独立势力崛起后，建设高科技军事力量的任务变得更加紧迫。中国领导人意识到，他们需要可靠的军事选项来遏制台湾独立和美国潜在的军事干预。从20世纪90年代中期开始，中国的军事现代化计划主要集中于应对可能发生的台湾危机，从而引发了随后二十年间与美国及其东亚盟友日本之间日益加剧的安全困境。

Based on official data, defense spending began its sustained rise in 1991 (see table 8.1). In nominal terms, China's military budget quadrupled between 1990 and 2000, or doubled after adjusting for inflation.57 Buoyed by the fast-growing economy, China accelerated investments in its military capabilities in the 2000s, with defense spending in real terms rising at an average of 12.5 percent per annum, significantly higher than the 7.8 percent per annum in the 1990s.58 By 2012, China's defense budget would reach ￥157 billion, second only to America's $684 billion.59 Whether official data truly reflect China's defense budget is hotly debated. Highly reputable research organizations and scholars have arrived at different estimates, most of which are higher than the official Chinese data.60 What is not in dispute, however, is that within two decades, Chinese military modernization achieved a level of progress few had anticipated. By the end of the post-Tiananmen era, the PLA had been transformed into a technologically advanced fighting force due to imports of advanced Russian weapons systems, such as Sukhoi jetfighters, Sovremennyy-class destroyers, supersonic antiship missiles, and indigenously produced high-tech weapons. As China's focus was on developing anti-access/area denial (A2/AD) capabilities to deter potential US intervention in a war with Taiwan, improvements in the Chinese navy and air force were especially rapid and significant.61

根据官方数据，国防开支自1991年开始持续增长（见表8.1）。按名义值计算，中国军费预算在1990年至2000年间增长了四倍，经通胀调整后增长了一倍。在经济快速增长的推动下，中国在21世纪初加快了对军事能力的投资，国防开支实际年均增长率达到12.5%，远高于1990年代的7.8%。到2012年，中国国防预算将达到1570亿元人民币，仅次于美国的6840亿美元。官方数据是否真实反映了中国的国防预算，目前仍存在激烈争论。众多权威研究机构和学者得出了不同的估算结果，其中大多数高于中国官方数据。然而，无可争议的是，在短短二十年间，中国军事现代化取得了远超预期的成就。到后天安门时代末期，解放军已转型为一支技术先进的作战力量，这得益于苏霍伊战斗机、现代级驱逐舰、超音速反舰导弹等先进俄制武器系统的引进，以及国产高科技武器的研制。由于中国当时的重点是发展反介入/区域拒止（A2/AD）能力，以遏制美国可能对台湾发动的战争，因此中国海军和空军的进步尤为迅速和显著。

TABLE 8.1. Official Defense Budget, 1990-2000

表 8.1. 1990-2000 年国防官方预算

Source:ZGTJNJ 2004,293.

来源：ZGTJNJ 2004,293。



Accompanying military modernization was a comprehensive reorientation of China's security and foreign policies to improve relations with its neighbors, in particular Russia and the Southeast Asian countries. As Chinese leaders reevaluated potential security threats, it became obvious that maritime threats, mainly Taiwan-related contingencies, had supplanted any danger of a land invasion from the former Soviet Union during the Cold War.62 Accordingly, China took dramatic steps to elevate ties with Russia in the immediate wake of the Cold War. The two countries reached an agreement on their eastern border in 1991 and a similar agreement on their western border three years later. In 1996 Jiang Zemin and President Boris Yeltsin announced establishment of a "strategic partnership." Bilateral defense cooperation greatly expanded the transfer of advanced weapons to China. Although the Sino-Russian "strategic partnership" at that time had serious limits, it vastly improved China's security situation in the north, allowing it to focus on its east and south maritime flanks.63 Beijing and Moscow would upgrade their defense cooperation in 2001 when, based on a Chinese initiative, they became the main sponsors of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO), which initially consisted of China, Russia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, and Tajikistan but would later grow to include also India, Iran, Pakistan, and Uzbekistan, turning it into a regional multilateral security forum.64

伴随军事现代化而来的是中国安全和外交政策的全面调整，旨在改善与邻国，特别是俄罗斯和东南亚国家的关系。随着中国领导人重新评估潜在的安全威胁，很明显，海上威胁（主要是与台湾相关的突发事件）已经取代了冷战时期来自前苏联的陆地入侵威胁。因此，冷战结束后，中国立即采取了一系列有力措施来提升与俄罗斯的关系。两国于1991年就东部边界达成协议，三年后又就西部边界达成类似协议。1996年，江泽民和叶利钦总统宣布建立“战略伙伴关系”。双边防务合作极大地促进了先进武器向中国的转让。尽管当时的俄中“战略伙伴关系”存在诸多局限，但它极大地改善了中国北方的安全形势，使其能够集中精力应对东部和南部的海上威胁。2001年，在中国的倡议下，北京和莫斯科成为上海合作组织（上合组织）的主要发起国，从而提升了双方的防务合作。上合组织最初由中国、俄罗斯、哈萨克斯坦、吉尔吉斯斯坦和塔吉克斯坦组成，后来又吸纳了印度、伊朗、巴基斯坦和乌兹别克斯坦，使其成为一个区域性多边安全论坛。

China made significant strides in Southeast Asia as well. In 1991 China normalized relations with Vietnam, which it had invaded in 1979. The two countries also signed an agreement demarcating their land borders in 1999. Throughout the 1990s, Beijing launched a charm offensive to reassure the Southeast Asian nations of its benign intentions. Its activities included more frequent visits to the region by top Chinese leaders and expansion of trade and cultural exchanges. Although China's seizure of the disputed Mischief Reef in 1995 momentarily damaged Beijing's credibility, its subsequent restraint calmed tensions. During the Asian financial crisis of 1997-1998, China raised its standing considerably in Southeast Asia by coming to the aid of Thailand, one of the hardest-hit countries, while Washington chose to take a pass.65

中国在东南亚也取得了显著进展。1991年，中国与越南实现了关系正常化，而中国曾在1979年入侵越南。两国还于1999年签署了划定陆地边界的协议。整个20世纪90年代，北京发起了一场魅力攻势，以消除东南亚国家的疑虑，让他们相信中国是善意的。其举措包括中国高级领导人更频繁地访问该地区，以及扩大贸易和文化交流。尽管中国在1995年占领了有争议的美济礁，一度损害了北京的信誉，但其随后的克制缓和了紧张局势。在1997-1998年亚洲金融危机期间，中国向受灾最严重的国家之一泰国伸出援手，而华盛顿却选择袖手旁观，这大大提升了中国在东南亚的地位。

Elsewhere in Asia, Chinese progress was more mixed. Relations with India warmed with exchange of visits by top leaders and a steady increase in trade, but negotiations over their long-disputed border made little progress and their geopolitical rivalries continued, albeit in a more subdued form.66 In Northeast Asia, China's greatest gain was the rapid development of ties with South Korea, with which China had established diplomatic relations in 1992. But ties with Japan deteriorated further in the 1990s as the result of disputes over sovereignty of the Senkaku/Diaoyu Islands (an issue Chinese leaders had wisely shelved in the 1980s), history, Chinese military modernization, and Taiwan.67

在亚洲其他地区，中国的发展则喜忧参半。中印关系随着两国高层互访和贸易稳步增长而升温，但双方就长期存在争议的边界问题进行的谈判进展甚微，地缘政治竞争依然存在，尽管有所缓和。在东北亚，中国最大的收获是与韩国关系的迅速发展，两国于1992年建交。但20世纪90年代，由于在钓鱼岛/尖阁诸岛主权问题（中国领导人在20世纪80年代明智地搁置了这一问题）、历史遗留问题、中国军事现代化以及台湾问题上的分歧，中日关系进一步恶化。





Confronting the Taiwan Challenge





应对台湾挑战


Except for the US-China dispute over arms sales, Taiwan did not present much of a foreign policy challenge to the mainland in the 1980s. Militarily, China lacked the capabilities to reunify with the island, to which the Nationalists (Kuomintang, KMT) retreated after losing the civil war to the Communists in 1949. Deng's top priority—economic modernization in a peaceful external environment—relegated reunification to the back burner. The government of the Republic of China (Taiwan's official name), then dominated by KMT elders, was not seeking de jure independence even as it began to liberalize the island's political system and open the door to political forces with a strong Taiwanese identity. Above all, stable and cooperative Sino-American relations throughout the decade bolstered mutual trust and restraint.

除了中美在军售问题上的分歧外，20世纪80年代台湾并未对中国大陆构成太大的外交挑战。在军事上，中国缺乏统一台湾的能力。国民党在1949年内战败给共产党后，便退守台湾。邓小平的首要任务是在和平的外部环境下实现经济现代化，这使得统一问题被搁置。当时由国民党元老主导的中华民国政府（台湾的正式名称）虽然开始推进政治体制的自由化，并向具有强烈台湾认同感的政治力量敞开大门，但并未寻求法理上的独立。最重要的是，整个80年代稳定且合作的中美关系增强了双方的互信和克制。

All this would change in the post-Cold War era. To be sure, relations between the mainland and Taiwan initially appeared to be headed for a breakthrough. In 1992 the PRC and ROC reached a critical formula, the so-called 92 Consensus, that basically papered over their differences over the definition of "one China." The 92 Consensus allowed each side to interpret or define its own meaning of one China while ostensibly accepting the concept of "one China."68 As China insisted on acceptance of its "one-China principle" as a precondition for dialogue across the Taiwan Strait, the 92 Consensus allowed Beijing and Taipei to explore a new modus vivendi despite the vast gulf existing between them. By the early 1990s, the mainland had also become an important trading partner and investment destination for Taiwan business. Taiwan's direct investments in China totaled $3.9 billion by 1994 and two-way trade in goods reached $16.3 billion, with Taiwan recording a large surplus of nearly $12 billion.69

这一切在后冷战时代都将发生改变。诚然，大陆与台湾的关系最初似乎正朝着突破的方向发展。1992年，中华人民共和国和中华民国达成了一项关键协议，即所谓的“九二共识”，该共识基本上掩盖了双方在“一个中国”定义上的分歧。“九二共识”允许双方各自诠释或定义“一个中国”的含义，同时表面上接受“一个中国”的概念。由于中国坚持将接受“一个中国原则”作为台海对话的前提条件，“九二共识”使得北京和台北得以探索一种新的共存模式，尽管双方之间存在着巨大的鸿沟。到20世纪90年代初，大陆也已成为台湾企业重要的贸易伙伴和投资目的地。截至1994年，台湾对中国大陆的直接投资总额达39亿美元，双边货物贸易额达163亿美元，其中台湾录得近120亿美元的巨额贸易顺差。

In spite of their growing commercial ties, however, cross-strait relations would undergo a radical change beginning in 1995. As the democratization process accelerated on the island of Taiwan in the late 1980s, especially after establishment of Taiwan's Democratic Progressive Party (DPP), which openly advocated independence, the political landscape experienced a dramatic transformation. Lee Teng-hui, the first native Taiwanese to hold the presidency of the ROC, who had assumed office after Chiang Ching-kuo died in January 1988, initially displayed an openness to dialogue with Beijing, as evidenced by the 92 Consensus. But Lee's mainland policy took a 180-degree turn in 1995 when he became a champion of Taiwanese sovereignty and identity—a change that not only prompted Beijing to label him a separatist but also led to a series of crises in cross-strait relations.

尽管两岸经贸联系日益紧密，但自1995年起，两岸关系发生了根本性的变化。20世纪80年代末，台湾民主化进程加速，尤其是在公开主张独立的民进党成立后，政治格局发生了剧烈的转变。李登辉是首位担任中华民国总统的台湾人，他在蒋经国于1988年1月去世后继任。李登辉最初展现出与北京对话的开放态度，这体现在“九二共识”中。然而，1995年，李登辉的对陆政策来了个180度大转弯，他转而支持台湾主权和身份认同——这一转变不仅招致北京对其“分裂分子”的指责，也引发了一系列两岸关系危机。

The first crisis, now called the "Third Taiwan Strait Crisis," began when Taiwan supporters in the United States successfully pressured the administration of Bill Clinton to issue an unprecedented visa to President Lee so he could travel to the United States and deliver the alumni reunion speech at his alma mater, Cornell University. In his speech, titled "Always in My Heart," Lee made remarks that mainland Chinese leaders saw as an open challenge to Beijing. In response, Beijing ordered the PLA to conduct a series of military exercises in the summer of 1995 that would culminate in the largest military drill in the Taiwan Strait in March 1996, around the time of the first popular presidential election held on the island that delivered to Lee a landslide victory. China's military intimidation against Taiwan, which included firing missiles close to the island, prompted US intervention. Clinton dispatched two carrier battle groups to the waters around Taiwan. Although the crisis ended without incident, this would be a powerful motivator for China to accelerate its military modernization and acquire capabilities to deal with future Taiwan-related contingencies.70

第一次危机，即如今所谓的“第三次台海危机”，始于美国支持台湾的人士成功向比尔·克林顿政府施压，促使其史无前例地向李登辉总统发放签证，使其得以赴美在其母校康奈尔大学发表校友返校演讲。李登辉在题为《永远在我心中》的演讲中发表了一些被中国大陆领导人视为对北京的公开挑战的言论。作为回应，北京命令解放军在1995年夏季举行一系列军事演习，最终在1996年3月举行了台海地区规模最大的军事演习。当时正值台湾举行首次全民总统选举，李登辉以压倒性优势获胜。中国对台湾的军事威慑，包括向台湾附近海域发射导弹，促使美国介入。克林顿派遣了两个航母战斗群前往台湾附近海域。尽管危机最终和平结束，但这无疑会极大地激励中国加快军事现代化进程，并提升应对未来涉台突发事件的能力。

But the 1995-1996 crisis was merely the beginning of more than a decade of escalating tensions. Lee continued to contest Beijing's claim of sovereignty over Taiwan. In July 1999 he publicly redefined the nature of cross-strait relations as "special state-to-state" relations, directly challenging Beijing's "one-China principle." Fortunately, even though Lee's rhetoric of "state-to-state" relations nearly touched China's red line, he did not take any legal action, such as amending the constitution or changing the national flag, to formalize his "two-state theory." China reacted angrily and issued threats, but it took no military actions, most likely because it did not want to derail its negotiations with the United States on WTO entry or precipitate a new confrontation with Washington right after the accidental NATO bombing of the Chinese Embassy in Belgrade in May of that year.

但1995-1996年的危机仅仅是长达十余年紧张局势升级的开端。李登辉继续挑战北京对台湾的主权声索。1999年7月，他公开将两岸关系重新定义为“特殊的国家间关系”，直接挑战北京的“一个中国原则”。幸运的是，尽管李登辉关于“国家间关系”的言论几乎触及了中国的红线，但他并未采取任何法律行动，例如修改宪法或更换国旗，来正式确立其“两国论”。中国对此反应强烈，并发出威胁，但并未采取任何军事行动，这很可能是因为中国不愿破坏其与美国就加入世贸组织进行的谈判，也不愿在同年5月北约误炸中国驻贝尔格莱德大使馆后，立即引发与华盛顿的新一轮对抗。

Tensions with Taiwan persisted after the election of Chen Shui-bian of the DPP as president in 2000. The rise of the DPP represented a sea change in Taiwan's political landscape, brought about by the island's transition to democracy and growth of a distinct Taiwanese identity separate from that of China. Fortunately for China, US-China relations stabilized after 9/11. As a result, the Chen government did not move further than Lee had in redefining cross-strait relations—except for an unsuccessful attempt to pass a referendum on Taiwan's self-defense and dialogue with the mainland (Chen had to water down the language due to American pressure).71 Although cross-strait relations stabilized after the KMT recaptured the presidency in 2008, the island's status and future would become a central point of contention between China and the United States. Even prior to the Xi Jinping era, as the rise of Taiwanese identity greatly dimmed prospects of peaceful reunification, Chinese leaders grew increasingly aware that only strong military capabilities could deter Taiwan and its foreign (mainly American) supporters from "acting rashly," as described by Jiang Zemin in summarizing the accomplishments of the PLA in the 1990s.72 With Taiwan assuming China's foremost national security priority and driving its military modernization program, the dynamics for exacerbating the US-China security dilemma ensued. The capabilities China was seeking to make its military options more credible would also erode America's unstated but nevertheless clear deterrence against this very option, thus triggering countermeasures. If the United States did not have to seriously worry about China's military strength in the early 1990s, this was no longer the case by the end of the post-Tiananmen era.

2000年民进党候选人陈水扁当选总统后，中台关系持续紧张。民进党的崛起标志着台湾政治格局的巨变，这源于台湾向民主转型以及与中国大陆截然不同的台湾身份认同的形成。幸运的是，9·11事件后中美关系趋于稳定。因此，陈水扁政府在重新定义两岸关系方面并未超越李登辉政府——除了曾试图就台湾自卫权和与大陆对话进行全民公投但最终失败（由于美国的压力，陈水扁不得不淡化措辞）。尽管国民党在2008年重新执政后两岸关系趋于稳定，但台湾的地位和未来仍成为中美之间争论的焦点。早在习近平时代之前，随着台湾认同感的增强，和平统一的前景变得黯淡，中国领导人日益意识到，只有强大的军事能力才能阻止台湾及其外国（主要是美国）支持者“鲁莽行事”，正如江泽民在总结解放军20世纪90年代的成就时所描述的那样。随着台湾成为中国国家安全首要关注点并推动其军事现代化进程，加剧中美安全困境的因素也随之出现。中国为增强其军事选项的可信度而寻求的能力，也将削弱美国虽未明言但却清晰可见的威慑力，从而引发美国的反制措施。如果说美国在20世纪90年代初不必对中国的军事实力感到担忧，那么到了后天安门时代末期，情况就截然不同了。





Embracing Globalization





拥抱全球化


A novel challenge that Deng did not anticipate but that Jiang Zemin had to confront was globalization—the rapid expansion of trade and investment flows across borders unleashed by the end of the Cold War. As geopolitical barriers fell and economic reforms in China and India accelerated in the 1990s, previously closed markets opened up, and a huge pool of workers in the developing countries became available for companies searching for low-cost labor.73 As noted by Jiang in a speech on foreign policy in 1998, for China, globalization represented both opportunities and challenges. Because the West possessed advantages in capital, technology, talent, finance, and nearly all other domains of globalization, it was poised to be the greatest beneficiary. According to Jiang, the developing countries, on the whole, would be disadvantaged; China could gain from globalization by acquiring more foreign capital, advanced technologies, and access to markets, even though it lacked overall economic competitiveness and it was the West that had made the rules of globalization and controlled international financial institutions. As no country could be immune from globalization, Jiang argued, China had to adapt to its trends and actively participate in international economic cooperation and competition. The overall strategic framework Jiang laid out in his 1998 speech was to be “clearly aware of the risks that economic globalization brings, maintain our independence and initiative, increase our level of vigilance, and become better able to fend off and defuse risks in order to effectively safeguard our country’s economic security.”74

邓小平未曾预料到，但江泽民必须面对的一个全新挑战是全球化——冷战结束后，跨境贸易和投资流动迅速扩张。随着地缘政治壁垒的瓦解，以及中印两国在20世纪90年代加速推进经济改革，此前封闭的市场逐渐开放，发展中国家庞大的劳动力资源也为寻求低成本劳动力的企业提供了机会。正如江泽民在1998年的一次外交政策演讲中所指出的，对中国而言，全球化既是机遇也是挑战。由于西方在资本、技术、人才、金融以及几乎所有其他全球化领域都拥有优势，因此它注定成为最大的受益者。江泽民认为，发展中国家总体上将处于劣势；中国虽然缺乏整体经济竞争力，而且全球化的规则和国际金融机构都由西方制定，但它仍然可以通过获得更多外国资本、先进技术和市场准入来从全球化中获益。江泽民认为，没有哪个国家能够置身全球化之外，中国必须顺应全球化趋势，积极参与国际经济合作与竞争。他在1998年的讲话中提出的总体战略框架是：“要充分认识到经济全球化带来的风险，保持自主性和主动性，提高警惕性，增强抵御和化解风险的能力，从而切实维护国家经济安全。”

This strategy to maximize the upsides of economic globalization and mitigate its risks guided China's international economic policy during the post-Tiananmen period. On the one hand, China aggressively courted international capital and technology and vigorously competed for market share in manufactured goods, leveraging the cost advantage of its immense labor force and unrivaled economies of scale. The most important step it took was to secure accession to the WTO in 2001. On the other hand, China also maintained protectionist measures and implemented an industrial policy to limit foreign competition in its domestic market and to overcome its disadvantages in more technology-intensive or emerging sectors, such as renewable energy.75

在后天安门时代，中国奉行的国际经济政策以最大限度地发挥经济全球化的优势并降低其风险为指导。一方面，中国积极吸引国际资本和技术，并凭借其庞大的劳动力成本优势和无可比拟的规模经济，在制成品领域展开激烈的市场份额竞争。其中最重要的一步是于2001年加入世界贸易组织。另一方面，中国也维持了贸易保护主义措施，并实施产业政策，以限制外国竞争进入国内市场，并克服其在技术密集型或新兴领域（例如可再生能源）的劣势。

Judging by the colossal gains of Chinese exports, the strategy laid out by Jiang was an unqualified success. In the year before its formal accession to the WTO on December 11, 2001, China's total merchandise exports totaled $226 billion, and it had a trade surplus of $22.5 billion. In 2012, the end of the post-Tiananmen period, China was exporting $2.04 trillion in goods and reporting a trade surplus of $230 billion.76 Paradoxically, however, the success of China's strategy of both embracing and safeguarding against globalization at the same time would damage trade ties with its Western partners, which likely did not anticipate the surge in Chinese exports after its accession to the WTO. At the same time, Chinese protectionism and industrial policies frustrated Western partners' efforts to gain access to its growing domestic markets and to compete with China on a level playing field. Although it would take two more decades for the West to start "decoupling" from China, the source of the breakdown was created by the successful, self-interested, but ultimately unsustainable strategy that Chinese leaders adopted in response to globalization.

从中国出口的巨大增长来看，江泽民制定的战略无疑取得了成功。在2001年12月11日正式加入世贸组织之前的一年，中国商品出口总额为2260亿美元，贸易顺差为225亿美元。到了2012年，即后天安门时代结束之际，中国商品出口额达到2.04万亿美元，贸易顺差为2300亿美元。然而，矛盾的是，中国既拥抱全球化又防范全球化的战略虽然成功，却损害了与西方伙伴的贸易关系，因为西方伙伴可能并未预料到中国加入世贸组织后出口的激增。与此同时，中国的保护主义和产业政策也阻碍了西方伙伴进入其不断增长的国内市场以及与中国公平竞争的努力。尽管西方还需要二十年时间才能开始与中国“脱钩”，但造成这种局面的根源在于中国领导人为应对全球化而采取的、成功的、自私的，但最终是不可持续的战略。





End of Hide-and-Bide





躲藏策略结束


Chinese foreign policy during the Jiang era was not without its moments of scares. In particular, Sino-American relations were severely tested by a series of crises, such as the Taiwan crisis of 1995-1996, the accidental NATO bombing of the Chinese Embassy in Belgrade in May 1999, and the midair collision of a Chinese jetfighter and a US reconnaissance plane in April 2001. Fortunately, in each case restraint and diplomacy enabled both sides to defuse tensions. If there was one pivotal moment when China's grand strategy of tao-guang yanghui was seriously imperiled, it was the election of George W. Bush in 2000, which was accompanied by entry into the US administration of national security hawks who had grown increasingly alarmed by the sustained growth of Chinese power in the 1990s. Chinese GDP measured in US dollars had risen from 7.5 percent of US GDP in 1992 to nearly 12 percent in 2000.77 Although the size of the Chinese economy was still a fraction of that of the American economy and smaller than the economies of Japan, Germany, and the United Kingdom, China was obviously catching up at a rapid pace. It should have come as no surprise that the Bush administration would designate China not as a "strategic partner" but as a "strategic competitor."78 Indeed, in the early months of the Bush administration, and particularly after the plane collision in 2001, Washington adopted a hard-line China policy, especially on the most sensitive issue of Taiwan (by allowing President Chen Shui-bian, leader of Taiwan's pro-independence DPP, to make an unprecedented, high-profile "transit visit" to New York).

江泽民时代的中国外交政策并非一帆风顺。特别是中美关系，经历了一系列危机的严峻考验，例如1995-1996年的台湾危机、1999年5月北约误炸中国驻贝尔格莱德大使馆事件以及2001年4月中国战斗机与美国侦察机空中相撞事故。所幸的是，在每起事件中，双方都凭借克制和外交手段化解了紧张局势。如果说中国“道光扬辉”大战略曾面临过一次真正的危机，那就是2000年乔治·W·布什当选总统。与此同时，一些鹰派人士进入美国政府，他们对中国在20世纪90年代的持续崛起日益感到担忧。以美元计价的中国GDP占美国GDP的比例从1992年的7.5%上升到2000年的近12%。尽管中国经济规模仍然远不及美国，也小于日本、德国和英国的经济规模，但中国显然正在快速追赶。因此，布什政府将中国列为“战略竞争对手”而非“战略伙伴”也就不足为奇了。事实上，在布什政府执政初期，尤其是在2001年空难之后，华盛顿采取了强硬的对华政策，尤其是在最敏感的台湾问题上（允许台湾民进党领导人陈水扁史无前例地高调“过境访问”纽约）。

Had 9/11 not occurred, it is highly likely that Sino-American relations would have continued their downward spiral, precipitating the full-fledged confrontation that was to occur two decades later. But the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001, changed the course of history. Bush's global war on terror immediately refocused America's strategic attention from China, a traditional strategic competitor, to a nonstate terrorist network, Al-Qaeda, and the war in Afghanistan that the United States launched less than a month after 9/11. Tensions between Beijing and Washington quickly subsided in the wake of 9/11. The Bush administration committed a much worse strategic blunder in March 2003 when it invaded Iraq on false pretenses, plunging the United States into a quagmire and extending China's strategic window of opportunity.79

如果没有发生9/11事件，中美关系很可能继续下滑，最终导致二十年后全面对抗的爆发。但2001年9月11日的恐怖袭击改变了历史进程。布什发起的全球反恐战争立即将美国的战略注意力从传统的战略竞争对手中国转移到非国家恐怖组织“基地”组织，以及美国在9/11事件发生不到一个月后发动的阿富汗战争。9/11事件后，北京和华盛顿之间的紧张关系迅速缓和。然而，布什政府在2003年3月犯下了一个更为严重的战略错误，即以虚假借口入侵伊拉克，使美国陷入泥潭，并延长了中国的战略机遇窗口。

When Hu Jintao took over from Jiang at the end of 2002, he inherited perhaps China's most favorable external environment of the post-Cold War era. Nevertheless, even with a distracted hegemon, Hu faced two new challenges that had not existed under Jiang. The first challenge was to counter the "China threat theory" that was gaining credence as a result of the rise of Chinese power during the Jiang period. This would require strategic reassurances through rhetoric and action. But at the same time, efforts to ease fears of China by its Asian neighbors, the United States, and its Western allies were likely made less credible by the measures China took to protect its expanding overseas interests, hence the second challenge. The new geopolitical reality, created in no small part by the very success of Deng's strategy of prioritizing domestic development and avoiding conflict with the West, meant that it would become increasingly difficult to adhere to taoguang yanghui. As Hu pointed out in a 2006 foreign policy speech, "the more developmental success" that China achieved, the more likely it would "encounter challenges of external resistance and risks," especially at a time when its overseas economic interests and emerging new opportunities demanded a more activist foreign policy.80

2002年底胡锦涛接替江泽民执政时，他或许继承了后冷战时代中国最为有利的外部环境。然而，即便面对的是一位注意力分散的霸权人物，胡锦涛也面临着江泽民时期从未出现过的两项新挑战。首先，要应对江泽民时期随着中国实力崛起而日益盛行的“中国威胁论”。这需要通过言辞和行动来安抚各方，以示战略上的安抚。但与此同时，中国为维护其不断扩大的海外利益而采取的措施，可能会削弱其安抚亚洲邻国、美国及其西方盟友对中国担忧的努力的可信度，这便是第二项挑战。新的地缘政治现实，很大程度上源于邓小平优先发展国内经济、避免与西方冲突的战略的成功，这意味着坚持“道光扬辉”的原则将变得越来越困难。正如胡锦涛在2006年的一次外交政策演讲中所指出的，中国取得的发展成就越多，就越有可能“遭遇外部阻力和风险的挑战”，尤其是在其海外经济利益和新兴机遇需要采取更加积极的外交政策之际。

To assuage fears of a rising China, Hu relied mainly on a rhetorical campaign emphasizing China's peaceful intentions. The "peaceful rise" narrative, energetically promoted by one of Hu's advisers in 2003, sought to project a benign image and to dispel any fears that the growth of Chinese power would lead to conflict and war. However, judging by the lukewarm, if not skeptical, foreign reaction to the "peaceful rise" rhetoric, this initiative apparently failed. Even worse, Hu Jintao did not appear to have gained enough political support within the party for using the phrase "peaceful rise" to frame the party's strategic reassurance efforts. Officially, the party preferred "peaceful development," thus incorporating it in Hu's speeches and official documents as a standard declaration of strategic intentions. The campaign to promote the "peaceful rise" rhetoric quickly fizzled out.81

为了消除外界对中国崛起的担忧，胡锦涛主要依靠强调中国和平意图的宣传攻势。2003年，胡锦涛的一位顾问大力推广“和平崛起”的叙事，旨在塑造一个温和的形象，消除外界对中国实力增长会导致冲突和战争的担忧。然而，从国际社会对“和平崛起”论调冷淡甚至怀疑的反应来看，这一举措显然失败了。更糟糕的是，胡锦涛似乎并未在党内获得足够的政治支持，以使用“和平崛起”这一措辞来构建党的战略安抚体系。官方层面，党更倾向于使用“和平发展”，并将其作为战略意图的标准表述写入胡锦涛的讲话和官方文件中。推广“和平崛起”论调的运动很快就偃旗息鼓了。

Hu's record in handling the second challenge was mixed. He highlighted the new strategic dilemma in a speech on foreign policy in August 2003. Unlike Jiang, who continued to reiterate Deng's dictum of taoguang yanghui when speaking on foreign policy, Hu highlighted the challenge of balancing taoguang yanghui and yousuo zuowei (making a contribution), a secondary guiding foreign policy principle that Deng had added in December 1990.82 Although Hu declared that China would adhere to Deng's caution against foreign entanglements, circumstances had changed and foreign policy decisions needed to be tailored to specific circumstances.83

胡锦涛在应对第二个挑战方面表现不一。他在2003年8月的外交政策讲话中强调了这一新的战略困境。与江泽民在谈外交政策时继续重申邓小平“道光扬辉”的原则不同，胡锦涛强调了平衡“道光扬辉”和“有索作威”（邓小平于1990年12月提出的外交政策第二原则）的挑战。尽管胡锦涛宣称中国将遵循邓小平避免卷入外部纷争的告诫，但形势已经发生变化，外交政策决策需要根据具体情况进行调整。

In terms of actual Chinese policy, the subtle revision of taoguang yanghui as revealed in Hu's speech in 2003, did not have an immediate impact. During his first term (2002-2007), Chinese foreign policy essentially followed the path laid out by Deng in 1990. This period saw marked improvement and stability in Sino-American relations. In August 2003, China sponsored the "six-party talks," including the United States, Japan, and South Korea, to seek a diplomatic solution to North Korea's development of nuclear weapons. (The talks yielded no results.) China's relations with most of its neighbors remained friendly. Ties with Europe warmed to such an extent that, in 2005, the European Union was mulling over lifting the arms embargo against China that it had imposed after the Tiananmen crackdown in 1989. (The idea was abandoned in face of fierce American opposition.)84

就中国实际政策而言，胡锦涛2003年讲话中对“道光扬晖”的微妙修正并未立即产生影响。在他第一个任期（2002-2007年）内，中国外交政策基本沿袭了邓小平1990年制定的路线。这一时期，中美关系显著改善并趋于稳定。2003年8月，中国发起包括美国、日本和韩国在内的“六方会谈”，寻求以外交途径解决朝鲜发展核武器的问题。（会谈未取得任何成果。）中国与大多数邻国的关系保持友好。中欧关系升温，以至于2005年，欧盟曾考虑解除1989年天安门事件后对中国实施的武器禁运。（但由于美国的强烈反对，这一想法最终被放弃。）

Chinese restraint during this period was likely the result of a combination of factors. Most importantly, this was because Jiang retained enormous influence through his proxies on the PSC and because Hu Jintao, in addition to his risk-averse personality, lacked foreign policy experience and political heft to "make a contribution." Tensions with Taiwan remained high because the proindependence DPP controlled the presidency until 2008, when the more mainland friendly KMT returned to power. An assertive foreign policy would have been ill-advised when China needed all the international goodwill it could get to isolate Taiwan. Despite waging two costly wars, in Iraq and Afghanistan, and risking a long-term quagmire, there were no signs of an imminent American decline. Instead, the epic real estate bubble in the United States produced a booming economy.

中国在这一时期的克制很可能是多种因素共同作用的结果。最重要的是，江泽民通过其在中华人民共和国政府中的代理人保持着巨大的影响力，而胡锦涛除了性格保守、规避风险外，也缺乏外交经验和政治影响力，难以“有所作为”。由于支持台独的民进党一直把持台湾总统职位直到2008年，之后亲大陆的国民党重新掌权，中台关系依然紧张。在当时中国需要尽可能争取国际支持以孤立台湾的情况下，采取强硬的外交政策显然是不明智的。尽管美国发动了伊拉克和阿富汗两场代价高昂的战争，并面临长期陷入泥潭的风险，但当时并没有迹象表明美国即将衰落。相反，美国房地产泡沫的膨胀反而推动了经济的蓬勃发展。

But things changed dramatically after 2008. China's successful hosting of the Summer Olympics in Beijing in August of that year delivered a powerful psychological boost to the Chinese leadership and symbolically marked the arrival of China as a great power on the global stage. Even more importantly, the GFC that began the spring of 2008 and culminated in the collapse of the giant American investment bank Lehman Brothers in September of that year threatened to plunge the United States and its key European allies into the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression. Chinese leaders' confidence was further bolstered by the stellar performance of the Chinese economy after they rolled out a huge credit-fueled stimulus package at the end of 2008.

但2008年后，情况发生了巨大变化。当年8月，中国在北京成功举办夏季奥运会，这极大地鼓舞了中国领导层的士气，也象征性地标志着中国正式跻身世界强国之列。更重要的是，始于2008年春季、最终导致美国巨型投资银行雷曼兄弟于同年9月倒闭的全球金融危机，几乎将美国及其主要欧洲盟友拖入自大萧条以来最严重的金融危机。2008年底，中国推出了一项规模庞大的信贷刺激计划，此后中国经济的强劲表现进一步增强了中国领导人的信心。

It was in this context that Hu Jintao signaled the most consequential change of direction in Chinese foreign policy in the post-Tiananmen era.85 In a speech to Chinese ambassadors in July 2009, Hu unveiled a new foreign policy principle of jianchi taoguang yanghui, jiji yousuo zuowei—continuing to keep a low profile and actively making a contribution. The addition of "actively" is no mere wordplay. As Hu elaborated, it was necessary to maintain a low profile and avoid conflict as China remained a developing country despite its recent progress. However, its growing external interests, rising "comprehensive national power," and international status required that it also take greater initiatives in foreign affairs and "actively push the development of the international political and economic order in a more just and reasonable direction." However, a more active foreign policy, Hu clarified, did not mean that China would bear any global responsibilities beyond its capabilities, despite Westerners calling on Beijing to become a "responsible stakeholder," thereby implying that China would become more active only to further its national interests.86

正是在这种背景下，胡锦涛标志着后天安门时代中国外交政策方向的重大转变。2009年7月，胡锦涛在对各国大使的讲话中提出了“保持低调，积极贡献”的新外交政策原则。其中“积极”二字绝非玩笑。正如胡锦涛所阐述的，尽管中国近年来取得了长足进步，但作为一个发展中国家，保持低调、避免冲突是必要的。然而，日益增长的外部利益、不断增强的“综合国力”和国际地位要求中国在外交事务中采取更大的主动性，“积极推动国际政治经济秩序朝着更加公正合理的方向发展”。然而，胡锦涛澄清说，更积极的外交政策并不意味着中国将承担超出其能力范围的全球责任，尽管西方呼吁北京成为“负责任的利益攸关方”，暗示中国更加积极地参与外交事务只是为了推进其国家利益。

Although Hu's version of foreign policy activism lacked the ambition, aggressiveness, and strategic coherence of the policy adopted by Xi Jinping after 2012, it marked the beginning of the end of Deng's strategy of "keeping a low profile." In practice, the shift was most pronounced in the expansion of Chinese external economic footprint through investment, loans, and aid, the projection of Chinese "soft power" through the establishment of Chinese language schools (the Confucius Institutes) and media outlets tasked with improving the country's image, and confrontational tactics in asserting Chinese maritime claims in the South China Sea and over the Senkaku Islands.

尽管胡锦涛的外交政策积极性不如习近平2012年后推行的政策那样雄心勃勃、咄咄逼人且具有战略连贯性，但它标志着邓小平“低调行事”战略走向终结。在实践中，这一转变最显著地体现在以下几个方面：中国通过投资、贷款和援助扩大其对外经济影响力；通过建立汉语学校（孔子学院）和旨在提升国家形象的媒体机构来展现中国的“软实力”；以及在南海和钓鱼岛等海域主张问题上采取对抗性策略。

Chinese foreign aid measured in concessional and nonconcessional loans averaged $7.6 billion between 2000 and 2008, but in the last four years of Hu's tenure (2009-2012), it averaged more than five times that, at $38.2 billion a year.87 In early 2009 China established a special $7.25 billion program to expand its overseas propaganda activities. Consequently, the presence of official Chinese media organizations, such as China Central Television, Xinhua, and Global Times, gained much higher visibility outside of China.88 Beijing also began to press its maritime claims more confrontationally. After a Chinese fishing crawler collided with two Japanese Coast Guard patrol boats in the waters near the disputed Senkaku/Diaoyu Islands in September 2010, Beijing chose to escalate, instead of defusing, the tensions with Tokyo. It also overreacted to Japan's plan to "nationalize" the same disputed islands (to prevent an ultra-nationalist from purchasing them), triggering the worst crisis in Sino-Japanese relations in the post-Mao period.89 In the South China Sea, China began harassing US naval vessels that were conducting freedom of navigation operations in China-claimed waters, and, in both 2009 and 2010, it imposed a unilateral three-month moratorium on fishing in the disputed areas that were also claimed by Vietnam.90

2000年至2008年间，中国对外援助（包括优惠贷款和非优惠贷款）平均为76亿美元，但在胡锦涛执政的最后四年（2009-2012年），平均每年达到382亿美元，是之前的五倍多。2009年初，中国设立了一项72.5亿美元的专项计划，旨在扩大其海外宣传活动。因此，中国中央电视台、新华社和《环球时报》等官方媒体机构在海外的影响力显著提升。北京也开始以更具对抗性的方式推进其海洋权益主张。2010年9月，一艘中国渔船在有争议的钓鱼岛/尖阁诸岛附近海域与两艘日本海上保安厅巡逻艇相撞后，北京选择升级而非缓和与东京的紧张关系。中国对日本“国有化”这些争议岛屿（以防止极端民族主义者购买这些岛屿）的计划反应过度，引发了后毛泽东时代中日关系最严重的危机。在南海，中国开始骚扰在声称拥有主权的海域进行航行自由行动的美国海军舰艇，并在2009年和2010年两次单方面对越南也声称拥有主权的争议海域实施了为期三个月的禁渔令。

Such muscle-flexing immediately alarmed some strategic analysts. In a prescient essay, initially published online in 2009, Li-tai Xue was the first to warn that China's hubris would inevitably lead to confrontation with the United States.91 Indeed, China's newfound activism actually had a perverse effect, discrediting Beijing's pledge of "peaceful development" and pushing its worried neighbors into the arms of Washington.92 It did not take long for the United States to seize this opportunity and begin to reassess its approach to Beijing. In November 2011 Secretary of State Hillary Clinton announced a new strategy, "Pivot to Asia," which would redirect American diplomatic, military, and economic resources to the region to counter China's growing influence.93

这种炫耀武力的行为立即引起了一些战略分析家的警觉。早在2009年，薛立泰就发表了一篇极具前瞻性的文章，率先警告说，中国的傲慢自大终将导致与美国的对抗。事实上，中国新近展现出的积极姿态反而产生了适得其反的效果，使北京“和平发展”的承诺失去了可信度，并促使其忧心忡忡的邻国转向华盛顿的怀抱。美国很快抓住这一机会，开始重新评估其对华政策。2011年11月，国务卿希拉里·克林顿宣布了一项名为“重返亚洲”的新战略，旨在将美国的外交、军事和经济资源重新投入该地区，以应对中国日益增长的影响力。

China's own pivot to "actively make a contribution," starting in Hu Jintao's second term, and America's response shortly thereafter would mark the beginning of the fraying of engagement between the two countries. To be sure, the collapse of relations would have to wait until Donald Trump and his China hawks launched their trade war in early 2018. But like the neo-authoritarian political order and the Chinese economic miracle at the end of the Hu Jintao era, the writing was clearly on the wall for a foreign policy that had served the party well—perhaps a bit too well for its own good—in the post-Tiananmen era.

中国在胡锦涛第二任期内转向“积极作出贡献”，以及美国随后作出的回应，标志着中美关系开始出现裂痕。诚然，两国关系的彻底破裂要等到2018年初唐纳德·特朗普及其对华鹰派发动贸易战之后才会发生。但正如胡锦涛时代末期新威权政治秩序和中国经济奇迹的出现一样，在后天安门时代，曾经为党服务良多——或许是过于有利——的外交政策的衰落已是显而易见。





A New Cold War





新冷战


Xi Jinping took huge and risky steps to exploit what he deemed to be unprecedented opportunities immediately after he ascended to top leader at the end of 2012. Notably, Hu Jintao at least had attempted to strike a delicate balance between strategic caution and assertiveness. He used taoguang yanhui in his foreign policy speeches to underscore the importance of strategic caution. Xi, however, did not even attempt to strike this balance. Indeed, if the invocation of taoguang yanhui is to be used as a rhetorical marker of strategic caution, it did not appear even once in Xi's many published speeches on foreign policy.

习近平在2012年底登上最高领导宝座后，立即采取了一系列大胆而冒险的举措，以利用他认为前所未有的机遇。值得注意的是，胡锦涛至少还试图在战略谨慎与果断之间寻求微妙的平衡。他在外交政策讲话中运用“审慎”一词来强调战略谨慎的重要性。然而，习近平甚至没有尝试寻求这种平衡。事实上，如果将“审慎”一词作为战略谨慎的修辞标志，那么在习近平发表的众多外交政策讲话中，它一次也没有出现过。

Instead, Xi characterized his early foreign policy moves as "proactive planning, striving for progress and gains" (zhudong mohua, nuli jinqu), as he put it in his speech at the party work conference on foreign policy in November 2014. The backdrop of his shift toward a more proactive foreign policy was the opportunity created by favorable changes in the world, which he characterized as "a world in which the international system and the international order are undergoing profound adjustments and . . . the international balance of power is undergoing profound changes and moving in a direction favorable to peace and development."94 Less than two years later, Xi was apparently pleased with this shift. Rephrasing it as "seizing opportunities and taking initiatives" (zhuazhu jiyu, zhudong zuowei), as he told the Politburo in September 2016, he cited a series of strategic initiatives, such as the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, and other efforts to promote "reform of unfair and unreasonable arrangements in the global governance system." These bold actions were justified because "as the relative international balance of power changes and global challenges rise, strengthening global governance and promoting reform of the system of global governance is an irresistible trend."95

相反，习近平将他早期的外交政策举措描述为“积极规划，争取进步和成果”（zhudong mohua, nuli jinqu），正如他在2014年11月召开的党的外交工作会议上所说。他转向更加积极主动的外交政策的背景是世界形势的有利变化所带来的机遇，他将其描述为“国际体系和国际秩序正在发生深刻调整，国际力量平衡正在发生深刻变化，并朝着有利于和平与发展的方向发展”。不到两年后，习近平显然对这一转变感到满意。他将其重新表述为“抓住机遇，采取主动”，正如他在2016年9月向政治局所言，并列举了一系列战略举措，例如“一带一路”倡议、亚洲基础设施投资银行以及其他旨在推动“改革全球治理体系中不公平、不合理安排”的努力。这些大胆行动的理由是，“随着国际力量相对平衡的变化和全球挑战的加剧，加强全球治理、推动全球治理体系改革已成为不可阻挡的趋势。”

Although the phrase "the East is rising and the West is declining" (dongsheng xijiang) cannot be found in any of his published speeches, Xi appeared convinced that the balance of power had evolved in favor of those countries or forces seeking a fundamental restructuring of the West-led political and economic order. He spelled out his analysis comprehensively at a January 2016 seminar for provincial leaders and ministers. Describing "unprecedented positive changes in the balance of power in the world," Xi listed the "rise of emerging markets and developing countries, the trends of multi-polarity and democratization of international relations, and emerging signs of changes in the West-led global governance system, ... the rapid rise of China's weight in the global economy and governance, and China's entry into a more balanced period in opening to the outside world" (which implied that China no longer needed the outside world as much as it used to). However, Xi did not allow his upbeat assessment of favorable global trends to ignore the challenges and obstacles. He cautioned that "the West's economic, technological, political, and military superiorities have yet to change."96

尽管习近平在其公开讲话中并未提及“东方崛起，西方衰落”的说法，但他似乎确信，权力平衡已经向那些寻求从根本上重塑西方主导的政治经济秩序的国家或势力倾斜。2016年1月，他在一次省级领导和部长级研讨会上详细阐述了自己的分析。习近平在描述“世界权力平衡前所未有的积极变化”时，列举了“新兴市场和发展中国家的崛起、国际关系多极化和民主化的趋势、西方主导的全球治理体系变革的迹象、……中国在全球经济和治理中的影响力迅速提升、中国对外开放进入更加平衡的时期”（这暗示着中国不再像过去那样依赖外部世界）。然而，习近平并没有因为对全球有利趋势的乐观评估而忽视挑战和障碍。他警告说，“西方在经济、技术、政治和军事方面的优势尚未改变。”

In addition to his reassessment of the changing balance of power, Xi was also motivated by his ideological antipathy toward the West and his grim view of America's security role in Asia, which China had consistently regarded as an instrument of containment. Perhaps the most explicit expression of Xi's ideological opposition to the West-led order can be found in his March 2013 speech in Moscow. "No country or group of countries can dominate world affairs single-handedly," Xi told his audience. There has been "an apparent upsurge of . . . rising hegemonism, power politics and neo-interventionism are gaining some momentum. . . . [the West] cannot live in the twenty-first century while thinking in the old fashion, lingering in the age of colonial expansion or with the zero-sum mentality of the Cold War. . . . Only the people can best tell if the development path they have chosen for their country suits or not."97

除了重新评估不断变化的力量平衡之外，习近平的行动也源于他对西方意识形态上的反感，以及他对美国在亚洲安全角色的悲观看法——中国一直将美国视为遏制的工具。或许，习近平对西方主导秩序意识形态上最明确的反对体现在他2013年3月在莫斯科的讲话中。习近平告诉听众：“没有任何一个国家或国家集团能够单枪匹马地主导世界事务。”他指出，“霸权主义、强权政治和新干涉主义的抬头势头明显……西方不能在21世纪还固守旧思维，沉湎于殖民扩张时代或冷战零和博弈的思维模式……只有人民自己才能判断他们为国家选择的发展道路是否合适。”

Like his predecessors, Xi accused unnamed "hostile forces at home and abroad" of attempting to bring about regime change in China. But he went beyond the boilerplate language of blaming the West for causing chaos through its interventionism. "Since the end of the Cold War," he said in a December 2015 speech, "some countries have been turned into a total mess because of the encouragement of Western values . . . some splintered, some engulfed in the flames of war, and some in persistent chaos. . . . If we use Western values to evaluate our development . . . the consequences are unthinkable. In the end, we either have to follow [the West] step by step or become objects of verbal abuse."98

与他的前任一样，习近平指责国内外“敌对势力”企图在中国进行政权更迭，但他并没有老生常谈地指责西方干涉主义造成混乱。他在2015年12月的一次讲话中说：“冷战结束以来，一些国家因为受到西方价值观的鼓吹而陷入混乱……有的国家四分五裂，有的国家战火纷飞，有的国家长期处于混乱之中……如果我们用西方价值观来衡量自身的发展……后果不堪设想。最终，我们要么一步步跟随西方，要么沦为被西方口诛笔伐的对象。”

While neither Jiang Zemin nor Hu Jintao made public their opposition to the role played by the United States in Asian security, Xi broke the taboo in May 2014 when he spoke at a high-profile regional security forum held in Shanghai. Without naming the United States, Xi declared, "In the final analysis, let the people of Asia run the affairs of Asia, solve the problems of Asia and uphold the security of Asia."99 Although he did not invoke "Asia for Asians," the phrase used by Japan in the 1930s, the implicit meaning of this statement came too close for Washington's comfort.

尽管江泽民和胡锦涛都没有公开反对美国在亚洲安全领域扮演的角色，但习近平在2014年5月于上海举行的一次高规格区域安全论坛上打破了这一禁忌。习近平没有点名美国，而是宣称：“归根结底，让亚洲人民管理亚洲事务，解决亚洲问题，维护亚洲安全。”尽管他没有引用日本在20世纪30年代使用的“亚洲人的亚洲”这一口号，但这句话的隐含意义却令华盛顿感到不安。





Strategic Initiatives to Remake the World Order





重塑世界秩序的战略举措


Xi's assessment of favorable global trends, in particular the rapid gains in Chinese power relative to that of the United States, was not delusional thinking. The Chinese economy was growing, on average, 9 percent per year between 2009 and 2013. By comparison, US growth during the same period averaged only 1.14 percent, largely due to the lingering effects of the global financial crisis. The euro area recorded, on average, negative growth of 0.3 percent per annum, and the Japanese economy barely grew during this period.100 What likely encouraged Xi the most was the size of the Chinese economy relative to that of the United States. When Hu told his colleagues to strike a balance between caution and activism in 2009, China's GDP was one-third that of the United States in dollar terms. By 2012, China's GDP had risen to $8.53 trillion, about half of America's $16.25 trillion. Under his watch, the gap would close further: when the US-China trade war broke out in 2018, Chinese economic output would reach $13.89 trillion, or 68 percent of America's $20.53 trillion.101 In terms of purchasing power, China reached parity with the United States in 2016, and it surpassed the United States as the world's largest economy in 2017.102

习近平对有利的全球趋势，特别是中国相对于美国实力的快速增长的评估，并非妄想。2009年至2013年间，中国经济年均增长9%。相比之下，同期美国经济年均增长率仅为1.14%，这主要是由于全球金融危机的持续影响。欧元区年均负增长0.3%，而日本经济在此期间几乎没有增长。最令习近平感到鼓舞的，或许是中国经济相对于美国的规模。2009年，胡锦涛要求其同事在谨慎与积极之间取得平衡时，中国GDP按美元计算仅为美国的三分之一。到2012年，中国GDP已增长至8.53万亿美元，约为美国16.25万亿美元的一半。在他的领导下，这一差距将进一步缩小：2018年中美贸易战爆发时，中国经济产出将达到13.89万亿美元，占美国20.53万亿美元的68%。101 按购买力平价计算，中国在2016年就与美国持平，并在2017年超越美国成为世界最大经济体。102

Militarily, even after President Barack Obama withdrew all American forces from Iraq in 2011, the United States was still bogged down in Afghanistan. The two wars had cost Washington trillions of dollars. The Pentagon has reported that it had spent $1.7 trillion on military operations in the Middle East and Afghanistan in the two decades following 9/11.103 Nongovernmental analysts estimate that the Afghanistan war alone drained $2.3 trillion from American coffers between 2001 and 2022.104

军事上，即使在奥巴马总统于2011年将所有美军撤出伊拉克之后，美国仍然深陷阿富汗战争泥潭。这两场战争耗费了华盛顿数万亿美元。五角大楼报告称，在9·11事件后的二十年里，美国在中东和阿富汗的军事行动中花费了1.7万亿美元。非政府分析人士估计，仅阿富汗战争一项，在2001年至2022年间就从美国国库中抽走了2.3万亿美元。

The erosion of American power not only threatened the durability of the US-led order but also encouraged its geopolitical rivals, such as Russia, to exploit those opportunities that a more disorderly world might offer. As for Xi, Russia's pivot away from the West since 2007, when Vladimir Putin delivered a bellicose speech denouncing the West at the Munich Security Conference, probably presented a historic opportunity to promote the shift from a unipolar world to a multipolar would—a goal shared by Beijing and Moscow.105

美国实力的削弱不仅威胁到美国主导的世界秩序的持久性，也促使其地缘政治对手，例如俄罗斯，去利用一个更加混乱的世界可能带来的机遇。至于习近平，自2007年弗拉基米尔·普京在慕尼黑安全会议上发表措辞强硬、谴责西方的演讲以来，俄罗斯逐渐疏远西方，这或许为推动世界从单极格局向多极格局转变提供了一个历史性的契机——而这正是北京和莫斯科的共同目标。

Although Xi's unveiling of the BRI in September 2013 is commonly regarded as one of China's most consequential steps signaling a decisive break with Deng's dictum of taoguang yanhui, his selection of Moscow as the destination for his first foreign trip after assuming the presidency in March 2013 probably represented an even more important change in Chinese post-Tiananmen foreign policy. As Moscow drifted farther away from the West, the forging of a close partnership with Vladimir Putin promised to instantly strengthen Xi's hand in dealing with the United States. Indeed, Xi's bet on Putin yielded quick dividends: After Russia seized Crimea and instigated a proxy war in eastern Ukraine in 2014, Moscow became firmly anchored inside Beijing's orbit, as reflected by the frequent summits, expansion of defense cooperation, and near-quadrupling of trade between 2012 and 2023.106

尽管习近平在2013年9月提出的“一带一路”倡议被普遍认为是中国历史上最具影响力的举措之一，标志着中国与邓小平“道光拒还”的理念决裂，但他在2013年3月就任国家主席后选择莫斯科作为首次出访目的地，或许代表了后天安门时代中国外交政策更为重要的转变。随着莫斯科与西方渐行渐远，与弗拉基米尔·普京建立紧密伙伴关系，有望立即增强习近平在与美国打交道时的筹码。事实上，习近平押注普京很快就获得了回报：在俄罗斯于2014年吞并克里米亚并在乌克兰东部挑起代理人战争后，莫斯科牢牢地被纳入北京的势力范围，这体现在频繁的峰会、不断扩大的防务合作以及2012年至2023年间近乎四倍的贸易额增长。

Immediately after his outreach to Putin, Xi launched a series of strategic initiatives at dizzying speed. The $1 trillion One-Belt, One-Road (later renamed the Belt and Road Initiative, or BRI) was launched in late 2013 to finance infrastructure such as ports, railways, highways, and power plants throughout the world. Although the intent, merits, and feasibility of this ambitious venture have since been hotly debated, the only uncontroversial fact about it is that the BRI represents China's most expensive effort ever to increase its global influence through economic means.107 To establish a financing vehicle, in November 2014 Xi announced the Silk Road Fund, which was to be launched with $40 billion from Chinese state-owned financial entities.

在与普京接触后，习近平立即以惊人的速度推出了一系列战略举措。2013年底，一项耗资1万亿美元的“一带一路”倡议（后更名为“一带一路”倡议，简称“BRI”）启动，旨在为全球港口、铁路、公路和电厂等基础设施建设提供资金。尽管这项雄心勃勃的计划的意图、价值和可行性此后一直备受争议，但唯一无可争议的事实是，“一带一路”是中国迄今为止通过经济手段提升其全球影响力的最昂贵举措。为了建立融资机制，习近平于2014年11月宣布成立丝路基金，该基金将由中国国有金融机构出资400亿美元。

As a direct but subtle challenge to the West-led World Bank and International Monetary Fund, China set up the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank in 2016, a Shanghai-based new multilateral international financial institution, with China as the largest shareholder. China also embraced the idea of a new development bank, initially proposed by India at a summit of the BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa) in March 2012. This bank, named the New Development Bank and headquartered in Shanghai, was formally launched in July 2014. China and the other BRICS each held a 20 percent share of the bank, which had initial authorized capital of $100 billion.108

为了直接而巧妙地挑战西方主导的世界银行和国际货币基金组织，中国于2016年成立了亚洲基础设施投资银行（AIIB），这是一家总部位于上海的新型多边国际金融机构，中国是其最大股东。此外，中国还采纳了印度在2012年3月金砖国家（巴西、俄罗斯、印度、中国和南非）峰会上提出的建立新开发银行的构想。这家名为新开发银行、总部设在上海的银行于2014年7月正式成立。中国和其他金砖国家各持有该银行20%的股份，其初始授权资本为1000亿美元。

In addition to flexing China's financial muscle to promote a new multipolar global economic order, Xi began to test the boundaries of the American security order in East Asia. The first step he took was the announcement of the East China Sea Air Defense Identification Zone (ADIZ), in November 2013. Many countries, including the United States and Japan, have set up such zones, which require aircraft entering airspace within them to identify themselves and report their course and destination to air traffic control authorities. But China's new ADIZ was seen as provocative because it covers the airspace over the disputed Senkaku/Diaoyu Islands.109

除了展现中国的经济实力以推动新的多极全球经济秩序外，习近平还开始试探美国在东亚安全秩序的边界。他采取的第一步是于2013年11月宣布设立东海防空识别区（ADIZ）。包括美国和日本在内的许多国家都设立了类似的区域，要求进入这些区域空域的飞机必须表明身份，并向空中交通管制部门报告其航线和目的地。但中国的新防空识别区被视为挑衅之举，因为它涵盖了存在争议的钓鱼岛/尖阁诸岛上空的空域。

An even more aggressive step taken by Xi was his decision to begin building large artificial islands on the reefs controlled by China in the South China Sea in December 2013. This gray zone move was designed to simultaneously accomplish several strategic objectives: By solidifying physical control of these areas contested by the Philippines and Vietnam, China hoped to strengthen its claims of sovereignty over most of the South China Sea without engaging in war. Since the Philippines and Vietnam are too weak to push back, China could also, theoretically at least, take additional gray zone steps, such as enforcing its maritime regulations on ships and aircraft transiting the waters and the airspace over the South China Sea, to assert its claims.

习近平采取的更具侵略性的举措是，他于2013年12月决定开始在南海中国控制的礁石上建造大型人工岛。这一灰色地带的举动旨在同时实现几个战略目标：通过巩固对菲律宾和越南存在争议的这些区域的实际控制，中国希望在不发动战争的情况下加强其对南海大部分地区的主权声索。由于菲律宾和越南实力不足以进行反击，中国至少在理论上还可以采取其他灰色地带的措施，例如对途经南海水域和空域的船舶和飞机强制执行其海上法规，以维护其主权声索。

An implicit but equally important strategic goal is to test US credibility as defender of the security order in East Asia. Although the United States has maintained neutrality in the maritime disputes in the South China Sea, a coercive move such as building large artificial islands would directly challenge the US role as provider of security in East Asia. A confrontation with China over its artificial islands could potentially escalate into a great power conflict. But acquiescing to Chinese aggression in this instance risked undermining the region's confidence in America's resolve when challenged by a great power.110 On the surface, it appears that it was Xi who took the strategic initiative to build the artificial islands. In all likelihood, this option must have been weighed seriously, if not approved, by the prior top leadership because the logistics for constructing these large artificial islands, such as building specialized ships for dredging and acquiring special materials, would have required years of planning and preparation. In this sense, Xi merely pulled the proverbial trigger of a loaded gun.

一个隐含但同样重要的战略目标是检验美国作为东亚安全秩序捍卫者的信誉。尽管美国在南海争端中保持中立，但建造大型人工岛等胁迫性举措将直接挑战美国作为东亚安全提供者的角色。与中国就其人工岛问题发生对抗，有可能升级为大国冲突。然而，在这种情况下默许中国的侵略行为，可能会削弱该地区对美国在面对大国挑战时的决心的信心。表面上看，似乎是习近平主动发起了建造人工岛的战略行动。但实际上，这一方案很可能经过了前任最高领导层的认真考虑，甚至可能得到了他们的批准，因为建造这些大型人工岛的后勤保障，例如建造用于疏浚的专用船舶和获取特殊材料，需要数年的规划和准备。从这个意义上讲，习近平只不过是扣动了一颗已经上膛的子弹的扳机而已。

The fateful initiatives Xi took immediately after his rise—in combination with his turn toward neo-Stalinist rule domestically—fundamentally altered the nature of the relationship between China and the West, in particular the United States, triggering a series of reactions that would later escalate into a new cold war.111

习近平上台后立即采取的一系列影响深远的举措，加上其在国内转向新斯大林主义统治，从根本上改变了中国与西方，特别是与美国的关系，引发了一系列反应，最终演变为一场新的冷战。





How Engagement Ended in a New Cold War





参战如何演变成一场新的冷战


The backlash against China's turn toward an assertive foreign policy that started in 2009 was initially muted. Under President Barack Obama, in response the United States began to implement its "pivot to Asia" policy centered on two pillars: strengthening military deterrence and creating a new free trade zone—the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP)—that would include most of China's neighbors but exclude China. Although the pace of reorienting the US defense posture toward East Asia was relatively slow, Washington's leadership of a new free trade agreement bore fruit quickly. Trade ministers from twelve countries inked the deal in October 2015.112

2009年中国转向强硬外交政策之初，外界对其的反弹并不强烈。在奥巴马总统的领导下，美国开始实施以“重返亚洲”为核心的战略，该战略围绕两大支柱展开：加强军事威慑和建立新的自由贸易区——跨太平洋伙伴关系协定（TPP），该协定涵盖中国的大部分邻国，但将中国排除在外。尽管美国将防务重心转向东亚的步伐相对缓慢，但华盛顿主导的新自由贸易协定却迅速取得了成果。2015年10月，来自12个国家的贸易部长签署了该协定。

Despite warnings from seasoned observers that US-China relations were on the brink of collapse, the NCW did not formally start until the arrival of Donald Trump in the White House in January 2017.113 Judging by the formal designation of China as a "revisionist power" seeking to "displace the United States in the Indo-Pacific region," the US "National Security Strategy" released in December 2017 signaled a fundamental shift in US policy toward China.114 Although Trump is credited with ending America's decades-long policy of engagement with China, his initial motivation was probably not geopolitical. A trade protectionist pandering to crucial battleground state workers who blamed China for losses of manufacturing jobs, the former real estate tycoon immediately withdrew the United States from the TPP and, one year later, launched a trade war with China. Xi's retaliation led to Trump escalating that war and, in May 2019, imposing sanctions on Chinese tech companies—most important, Huawei, the national telecom champion.

尽管资深观察人士曾警告美中关系濒临崩溃，但直到2017年1月唐纳德·特朗普入主白宫后，中美关系才正式恶化。美国于2017年12月发布的《国家安全战略》将中国正式列为“修正主义大国”，并指责其试图“取代美国在印太地区的地位”，这标志着美国对华政策发生了根本性转变。尽管特朗普被认为是终结美国长达数十年的对华接触政策的罪魁祸首，但他最初的动机可能并非出于地缘政治考量。这位前房地产大亨为了迎合那些指责中国导致制造业岗位流失的关键摇摆州的工人，采取了贸易保护主义立场，立即让美国退出了跨太平洋伙伴关系协定（TPP），并在一年后对中国发动了贸易战。习近平的报复导致特朗普升级了这场战争，并在 2019 年 5 月对中国科技公司实施制裁——其中最重要的是中国电信巨头华为。

US-China relations went into a free fall after the outbreak of Covid-19 in early 2020.115 Worried about the potential damage to his reelection bid, Trump blamed—and punished—China for unleashing the deadly virus. He ordered the closure of the Chinese consulate in Houston and expelled its diplomats (China retaliated by shutting down America's consulate in Chengdu). The victory of Joe Biden in November 2020 did not end the downward spiral. If anything, the US-China cold war entered a new and more complex phase. Unlike the erratic Trump administration, Biden's foreign policy team crafted a more sophisticated containment strategy. As spelled out by the key players on Biden's national security team, the new China policy rested on four pillars: building up economic capacities at home to strengthen US competitiveness, contesting Chinese power in all domains, strengthening alliances, and establishing safeguards to avoid a calamitous conflict.116

2020年初新冠疫情爆发后，美中关系急剧恶化。特朗普担心疫情可能影响其连任，因此指责中国释放了这种致命病毒，并对其进行了惩罚。他下令关闭中国驻休斯顿总领事馆，并驱逐了中国外交官（中国随即关闭了美国驻成都总领事馆作为报复）。2020年11月拜登的胜选并未结束这一恶性循环。相反，美中冷战进入了一个更加复杂的新阶段。与反复无常的特朗普政府不同，拜登的外交政策团队制定了一项更为精细的遏制战略。正如拜登国家安全团队的关键成员所阐述的那样，新的对华政策基于四大支柱：增强国内经济实力以提升美国竞争力；在各个领域与中国抗衡；加强盟友关系；以及建立保障机制以避免灾难性冲突。

To counter the United States, Xi decided to elevate China's strategic partnership with Russia in the belief that the overall geopolitical interests of Moscow and Beijing—fear and resentment of US power—were identical. But a few weeks after Xi and Putin announced their "no-limit friendship" in Beijing in early February 2022, Russia invaded its neighbor, Ukraine, launching the largest and bloodiest war on continental Europe since the end of World War II. Europe saw China as Russia's accomplice and began to adopt a more hawkish China policy, closely aligned with that of the United States.

为了对抗美国，习近平决定提升中俄战略伙伴关系，他认为莫斯科和北京的整体地缘政治利益——对美国实力的恐惧和不满——是一致的。然而，就在习近平和普京于2022年2月初在北京宣布“无限友谊”几周后，俄罗斯入侵邻国乌克兰，发动了二战结束以来欧洲大陆规模最大、伤亡最惨重的战争。欧洲将中国视为俄罗斯的帮凶，并开始采取与美国更为强硬的对华政策。

Speaking to the delegates at the annual session of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference on March 6, 2023, Xi acknowledged the obvious. Although he avoided the term "cold war," he formally accused the United States of leading its allies to implement "all-round containment, encirclement, and suppression of China."117 He did not bother to explain what had caused this NCW. It is highly unlikely that he would have attributed his own actions as a possible cause of the hostile and dangerous Sino-US confrontation—a great power conflict expected to last for decades and to make his dream of the "great rejuvenation of the Chinese nation" an unachievable goal.

2023年3月6日，习近平在全国政协年度会议上向与会代表发表讲话，承认了显而易见的事实。尽管他避免使用“冷战”一词，但他正式指责美国及其盟友对中国实施“全方位遏制、包围、压制”。他没有解释这场冷战的起因。他极不可能将自己的行为归咎于中美之间敌对且危险的对抗——这场预计将持续数十年、并使他“中华民族伟大复兴”的梦想成为遥不可及的目标的大国冲突。





Conclusion





结论


THIS ACCOUNT of political and economic developments in post-Mao China explores the factors that likely have prevented the country from moving in the direction of becoming a more open, liberal, and democratic society. Instead, they have facilitated the revival of totalitarian rule in spite of more than four decades of sustained rapid economic development. In the 1980s the CCP leadership agreed that the Maoism that had impoverished the country, traumatized the party, and discredited the Communist ideology should be brought to an end. But the leadership was deeply divided about reforming the country's economic and political systems. Pragmatic Leninists represented by Deng Xiaoping and hardcore conservatives led by Chen Yun clashed over the direction and scope of economic reforms. Deng aggressively pushed market-oriented reforms and integration with the capitalist West because he believed that this strategy would deliver favorable economic outcomes and ensure the survival of the party and the rise of China as a great power. In contrast, Chen and his followers resisted such reforms and sought to repair and restore the command economy as a safer strategy to salvage the party. Nevertheless, despite their differences over economic policy, these two groups that dominated the elite political scene in the 1980s shared an identical objective of preserving the party's political monopoly. A third group of leaders were liberal reformers who sought both economic and political liberalization. But due to their political weakness, their success critically depended on support from Deng.

本文对后毛泽东时代中国的政治经济发展进行了分析，探讨了可能阻碍中国走向更加开放、自由和民主社会的因素。相反，尽管经历了四十多年的持续快速经济发展，这些因素却促成了极权统治的复兴。上世纪80年代，中共领导层一致认为，必须终结使国家贫困、给党造成创伤、并使共产主义意识形态蒙羞的毛泽东思想。然而，领导层在改革国家经济和政治体制方面存在严重分歧。以邓小平为代表的务实列宁主义者和以陈云为首的强硬保守派在经济改革的方向和范围上存在冲突。邓小平积极推动市场化改革和与资本主义西方的融合，因为他相信这一战略能够带来良好的经济成果，确保党的生存和中国崛起为世界强国。与此相反，陈及其追随者抵制此类改革，并试图修复和恢复计划经济体制，认为这是挽救党的更稳妥策略。然而，尽管在经济政策上存在分歧，但主导20世纪80年代政治精英的这两派却有着相同的目标：维护党的政治垄断地位。第三派领导人是自由派改革者，他们寻求经济和政治的双重自由化。但由于政治上的弱势，他们的成功在很大程度上依赖于邓小平的支持。

When Deng needed the liberals to advance his economic agenda, this coalition could overcome the resistance of the hard-liners and make progress in implementing market reforms. But the political reform agenda promoted by the liberals was anathema to both the pragmatic Leninists and the hardcore conservatives. Whenever the top leadership confronted the issue of political liberalization in the 1980s, Deng not only would form an ad hoc coalition with the hard-liners but also would take the lead in opposing liberalization. The combination of Deng's staunch antiliberal stance and the power of the other hard-liners thus precluded any meaningful political reform. Consequently, Maoism as a set of policies and practices might have ended, but the underlying totalitarian institutions that had made it possible and potentially revivable were preserved.

当邓小平需要自由派人士推进其经济议程时，这个联盟能够克服强硬派的阻力，并在市场改革方面取得进展。但自由派人士所倡导的政治改革议程，却令务实的列宁主义者和顽固的保守派都深恶痛绝。20世纪80年代，每当最高领导层面临政治自由化问题时，邓小平不仅会与强硬派临时结成联盟，还会带头反对自由化。邓小平坚定的反自由主义立场，加上其他强硬派的势力，使得任何有意义的政治改革都无从谈起。因此，毛泽东思想作为一套政策和实践或许已经终结，但使其得以存在并可能复兴的极权主义制度却得以保留。

The crackdown on the prodemocracy protests in June 1989 resulted in a complete purge of the liberal reformers represented by Zhao Ziyang and their replacement by politically conservative technocrats. Although Deng's "reform and opening" appeared all but dead immediately after the crackdown, paradoxically the collapse of the Soviet Union in December 1991 enabled Deng to rally a thoroughly demoralized party behind his neo-authoritarian developmentalism as the only feasible survival strategy in a world in which liberal capitalist democracies had won a decisive victory over communism.

1989年6月对民主运动的镇压导致以赵紫阳为代表的自由派改革者被彻底清洗，取而代之的是政治保守的技术官僚。尽管邓小平的“改革开放”在镇压后几乎宣告失败，但矛盾的是，1991年12月苏联的解体却使邓小平得以将士气低落的党团结在他的新威权发展主义战略之下，因为在自由资本主义民主国家已经取得对共产主义决定性胜利的世界中，这似乎是唯一可行的生存策略。

During the post-Tiananmen neo-authoritarian period (1992-2012), the party under the leadership of Jiang Zemin and Hu Jintao put Deng's vision into practice, largely through experimentation and adaption. With the party solidly behind the neo-authoritarian developmental consensus, Chinese leaders were able to implement more radical economic reforms, maintain domestic stability through a mix of performance legitimacy, nationalism, soft repression, and co-optation, and pursue a cautious foreign policy to stabilize ties with the West—China's most important external source of capital, demand, and technology. A fragile balance of power, produced mainly by accidental factors (the transfer of power from the revolutionary titans to relatively weak leaders in the 1990s), sustained a collective leadership. Although socioeconomic modernization produced some forces that challenged party power, such as the information revolution, social unrest, and the growing civil society, the regime had no difficulty containing these emerging threats.

在后天安门时代的新威权时期（1992-2012年），在江泽民和胡锦涛的领导下，中共将邓小平的构想付诸实践，主要通过试验和调整来实现。由于党坚定地支持新威权主义的发展共识，中国领导人得以推行更为激进的经济改革，通过政绩合法性、民族主义、软性镇压和拉拢等手段维护国内稳定，并奉行谨慎的外交政策以稳定与西方——中国最重要的外部资本、需求和技术来源——的关系。一种主要由偶然因素（20世纪90年代革命巨擘向相对弱势的领导人转移权力）造成的脆弱权力平衡，维系着集体领导。尽管社会经济现代化催生了一些挑战党权的因素，例如信息革命、社会动荡和日益壮大的公民社会，但政权能够轻松遏制这些新出现的威胁。

But the post-Tiananmen order began to crack even before the rise of Xi Jinping. During the second half of Hu Jintao's rule (2007-2012), the economy started losing momentum. The lack of deeper reform during Hu's first term (2003-2007) resulted in a less dynamic economy. Only a massive injection of credit into the economy, which in turn inflated a colossal real estate bubble, kept the economy on track. At the same time, a succession struggle began to intensify, triggering a new round of elite conflicts that ended with the most sordid scandal in post-Mao history and installed an unknown princeling who was thought to be a "safe" choice to take over from Hu Jintao. On the foreign policy front, Chinese leaders, bolstered by the rapid change in the relative balance of power between China and the West due to the global financial crisis and America's "forever wars" in the Middle East and Afghanistan, more aggressively pursued China's global interests.

但天安门事件后的秩序早在习近平上台之前就开始出现裂痕。在胡锦涛执政的后半期（2007-2012年），经济增长开始放缓。胡锦涛第一任期（2003-2007年）缺乏深层次的改革，导致经济活力不足。只有向经济注入大量信贷，进而催生出巨大的房地产泡沫，才勉强维持了经济的运转。与此同时，权力交接之争愈演愈烈，引发了新一轮的精英冲突，最终以毛泽东时代之后最丑闻缠身的丑闻告终，并扶植了一位名不见经传的“太子党”，此人被认为是接替胡锦涛的“稳妥之选”。在外交政策方面，受全球金融危机以及美国在中东和阿富汗的“旷日持久的战争”的影响，中西方力量对比迅速发生变化，中国领导人更加积极地维护中国的全球利益。

The waning of neo-authoritarian developmentalism toward the end of the Hu Jintao era should not have made the return of totalitarian rule inevitable. The regime conceivably could have muddled through in the same way as Hu had during his decade in power. But the combination of accidental and institutional factors would produce a great leap backward few had seen coming. Specifically, the choice of Xi Jinping as Hu Jintao's successor was an accident—a disastrous mistake made by those who had selected him almost certainly in full ignorance of his ambition and ruthlessness. Until he became the party chief of Shanghai in March 2007, Xi had been a plausible but not inevitable successor to Hu. His eventual selection as the party's future leader in November 2007 was the outcome of a power struggle between two unrelated factions.

胡锦涛时代末期新威权发展主义的衰落本不应导致极权统治的回归不可避免。该政权或许可以像胡锦涛执政十年那样勉强维持下去。然而，一系列偶然因素和制度性因素的叠加，导致了一次几乎无人预料的巨大倒退。具体而言，选择习近平作为胡锦涛的接班人纯属偶然——这是那些几乎肯定完全不了解他的野心和冷酷无情的人犯下的一个灾难性错误。在2007年3月担任上海市委书记之前，习近平一直是胡锦涛的可能接班人，但并非必然。他最终在2007年11月当选为中共未来领导人，是两个互不相干的派系之间权力斗争的结果。

But once he gained the top position in November 2012, there were few obstacles preventing him from amassing power and re instituting totalitarianism. The rules on collective leadership that Deng had established were too weak to stop Xi. Furthermore, Xi's weaponization of anticorruption prosecution gave him terrifying leverage over any rivals daring to challenge his power. Meanwhile, well-preserved totalitarian institutions, in particular the Leninist party-state and the regime's total control of the means of violence, enabled him to reimpose tight organizational discipline on the party and to reestablish the rule of fear over society. In all likelihood, Xi might not have anticipated the ease with which he could, almost single-handedly, dismantle the post-Tiananmen order and restore personalistic rule. In retrospect, he probably underappreciates how much he owes his rise and subsequent success to Deng Xiaoping and his policies.

但习近平在2012年11月登上权力巅峰后，几乎没有什么能阻止他攫取权力、重建极权统治。邓小平建立的集体领导规则过于薄弱，无法阻止习近平。此外，习近平将反腐斗争武器化，使他拥有了足以震慑任何胆敢挑战其权力的对手的强大力量。与此同时，保存完好的极权制度，特别是列宁主义的党国体制以及政权对暴力手段的全面掌控，使他能够重新对党内实施严格的组织纪律，并恢复对社会的恐惧统治。习近平或许并未预料到，他几乎凭借一己之力就能如此轻易地瓦解天安门事件后的秩序，恢复个人统治。事后看来，他可能低估了邓小平及其政策对他的崛起和后续成功所起的作用。





Limitations of Deng Xiaoping and Dengism





邓小平和邓主义的局限性


Our examination of party politics in the 1980s and the long-term consequences of Deng Xiaoping's policies raises questions both about Deng's political leadership and about the limitations of Deng's neo-authoritarian developmentalism. To be sure, it is unreasonable to expect Deng, a veteran of the Chinese revolution emotionally committed to the preservation of the CCP, to have acted like a liberal democrat. Additionally, Deng's personal contribution to Chinese economic modernization is beyond dispute because of his outsized role in launching "reform and opening" in 1979. But in retrospect, Deng was also a flawed leader with a distorted vision of modernization. His shortcomings as a political leader severely limited what he could achieve during the 1980s and, even more important, created conditions for a reversal of many of the policies he had crafted to achieve economic modernization.

我们对20世纪80年代党内政治以及邓小平政策长期后果的考察，引发了人们对邓小平政治领导能力以及其新威权发展主义局限性的质疑。诚然，指望一位对维护中共抱有强烈情感的中国革命老将邓小平像一位自由民主主义者那样行事是不合理的。此外，邓小平对中国经济现代化的个人贡献毋庸置疑，因为他在1979年启动“改革开放”中发挥了举足轻重的作用。但回望过去，邓小平也是一位有缺陷的领导人，他对现代化的理解存在偏差。他作为政治领导人的不足严重限制了他在20世纪80年代的成就，更重要的是，这些不足为他为实现经济现代化而制定的许多政策的倒退埋下了隐患。

Ideologically, Deng's visceral hostility to liberal democracy unavoidably undercut his effectiveness in pushing through his economic reform agenda and led to the purge of those liberal leaders who had been indispensable to the success of his reforms. After he dismissed Hu Yaobang in January 1987, Deng was unable to restore the momentum of his economic reforms. His decision to order the military to crush the prodemocracy protests in June 1989 and his purge of Zhao Ziyang, the liberal party chief who had been instrumental in launching Deng's economic reform agenda, not only tarnished his own personal legacy but also deprived him of the only remaining partner at the top of the regime who could have helped advance his "reform and opening." In fact, Deng's modernization project was all but dead in the immediate aftermath of the Tiananmen crackdown in June 1989. But he managed to breathe new life into it after the fall of the Soviet Union in December 1991 so shocked and demoralized the hard-liners that they reluctantly rallied behind his neo-authoritarian survival strategy.

从意识形态上看，邓小平对自由民主的根深蒂固的敌意不可避免地削弱了他推行经济改革的效力，并导致那些对其改革成功至关重要的自由派领导人遭到清洗。1987年1月解职胡耀邦后，邓小平再也无法重振经济改革的势头。1989年6月，他下令军队镇压民主运动，并清洗了曾为邓小平经济改革做出重要贡献的自由派党总书记赵紫阳，这不仅损害了他个人的政治遗产，也使他失去了政权高层中唯一一位能够帮助他推进“改革开放”的伙伴。事实上，邓小平的现代化工程在1989年6月天安门事件后几乎就此夭折。但1991年12月苏联解体后，强硬派深受打击，士气低落，邓小平设法使现代化工程重获新生，他们不情愿地团结在他的新威权主义生存战略之下。

Deng's neo-authoritarian developmentalism—unreserved embrace of capitalism and globalization as a means of economic modernization under one-party rule—initially achieved spectacular results in the post-Tiananmen era. But over time, the flaws in this strategy became visible. The logic of the partial reform trap reduced the incentives for the post-Deng leadership to adopt more politically difficult economic reforms, while the hybrid economy bred voracious crony capitalism and fueled rising social tensions.

邓小平的新威权发展主义——在党的统治下，无条件地拥抱资本主义和全球化，以此作为经济现代化的手段——在后天安门时代初期取得了显著成效。但随着时间的推移，这一战略的缺陷逐渐显现。局部改革陷阱的逻辑削弱了后邓小平时代领导层推行更具政治难度的经济改革的动力，而混合经济模式则滋生了贪婪的裙带资本主义，并加剧了日益紧张的社会局势。

The pervasive corruption and the stalled reforms created favorable conditions for the return of a strongman leader who could capitalize on both popular dissatisfaction and the festering rot within the regime to reestablish political dominance. Had Deng erected solid institutional and political guardrails in the 1980s to prevent the future return of a Mao-like figure, Xi Jinping likely would have encountered greater obstacles in his attempts to restore totalitarianism.

普遍存在的腐败和停滞不前的改革为强人领导人的回归创造了有利条件，他可以利用民众的不满和政权内部的腐败，重新确立政治统治地位。如果邓小平在20世纪80年代建立了坚实的制度和政治保障措施，以防止毛泽东式人物的再次出现，那么习近平在试图恢复极权主义的过程中很可能会遇到更大的阻力。

The truth is that the steps Deng took in the 1980s were only partial and, in the end, ineffective in enforcing the party's own rules against lifetime tenure, the concentration of power in one man, and the revival of a personality cult. Technically, the rules on term limits, collective leadership, and a personality cult that Deng had stipulated in the early 1980s were vague and unenforceable. Due to his antipathy toward democracy, he did not allow any political forces to exist outside the party, thus making the party (specifically its top leaders) the sole enforcer of its rules. When power was evenly distributed among the top leaders and their factions, as it had been between 1992 and 2012, these rules could be enforced. But when this fragile balance of power disappeared after the rise of Xi in late 2012, the edifice of collective leadership collapsed like a house of cards.

事实上，邓小平在20世纪80年代采取的措施只是部分性的，最终未能有效执行党内自身制定的反对终身制、权力集中于一人以及个人崇拜复兴的规则。从技术层面讲，邓小平在20世纪80年代初制定的关于任期限制、集体领导和个人崇拜的规则模糊不清，难以执行。由于他对民主的反感，他不允许任何政治力量存在于党外，从而使党（特别是其最高领导人）成为规则的唯一执行者。当权力在最高领导人及其派系之间平均分配时，例如在1992年至2012年期间，这些规则是可以得到执行的。但是，随着习近平在2012年底的崛起，这种脆弱的权力平衡消失了，集体领导的体系也像纸牌屋一样轰然倒塌。

Given the systematic reversal of Deng's foreign and domestic policies under Xi's rule, it is tempting to conclude that Xi's regime represents a fundamental break with Deng's regime. This assessment is true when it comes to the differences in tactics and the key strategic assumptions (such as the main source of threats to the party's survival and the balance of geopolitical power). Xi, a dogmatic Leninist, is the opposite of Deng, who was a pragmatic Leninist. But if we look at what these two leaders have in common, perhaps we will find that the discontinuities are superficial and the continuities between the two are fundamental. Both are hardcore Leninists who regard preservation of the party's monopoly of power as the overriding objective of their rule. They achieved this objective regardless of the costs: Deng would order a brutal suppression of the peaceful protests and would purge the leaders who did the most to help him launch his "reform and opening," while Xi would resort to totalitarian practices to neutralize all threats, real or imagined, to party rule. Both have a strong ideological antipathy to liberal democracy; both believe that only hard power can protect China from Western domination; both see the liberal West as an existential threat to one-party rule; and both regard the US-led international order as illegitimate and unjust. The answer to why Xi would adopt policies and tactics that Deng almost certainly would not have approved must be sought in their respective calculations of Chinese power and the costs of a given course of action. Deng had a far more realistic and astute assessment of Chinese power and a better understanding of the costs of his policies. In contrast, Xi has demonstrated a tendency to overestimate Chinese power and to underestimate the costs of his policies.

鉴于习近平执政期间邓小平内外政策的系统性逆转，人们很容易得出这样的结论：习近平政权与邓小平政权存在根本性的决裂。这种评估在策略差异和关键战略假设（例如党的生存面临的主要威胁来源和地缘政治力量平衡）方面确实成立。习近平是一位教条的列宁主义者，与务实的列宁主义者邓小平截然相反。但如果我们审视这两位领导人的共同之处，或许会发现，他们之间的差异只是表面上的，而本质上的延续才是关键。他们都是坚定的列宁主义者，都将维护党的权力垄断视为其统治的首要目标。为了实现这一目标，他们不惜一切代价：邓小平会下令残酷镇压和平抗议，并清洗那些为他推行“改革开放”做出最大贡献的领导人；而习近平则会诉诸极权主义手段，消除一切对党的统治构成威胁的因素，无论这些威胁是真实存在的还是臆想出来的。两人都对自由民主抱有强烈的意识形态反感；两人都认为只有硬实力才能保护中国免受西方主导；两人都视自由主义的西方为对一党专政的生存威胁；两人都认为美国主导的国际秩序是不合法且不公正的。习近平为何会采取邓小平几乎肯定不会赞同的政策和策略，其原因必须从他们各自对中国实力和特定行动成本的考量中寻找答案。邓小平对中国实力的评估更为现实和敏锐，对自身政策的成本也有更深刻的理解。相比之下，习近平则表现出高估中国实力、低估自身政策成本的倾向。





An Inevitable New Cold War?





新冷战不可避免？


The NCW between China and the United States that began toward the end of the 2010s and escalated after Russia's invasion of Ukraine in 2022 has plunged the world into another dark era of great power confrontation and has resurrected the specter of war between nuclear-armed adversaries. Future historians will undoubtedly debate the causes of the NCW. Our account of China's political and economic developments in the post-Mao era reaches a more nuanced conclusion regarding whether the NCW was inevitable. On the one hand, the odds of integrating China into a West-led international order were evidently poor because Chinese leaders themselves consistently viewed this order as illegitimate and unjust. The nature of the one-party regime also meant that it would be nearly impossible to fully integrate a CCP-ruled China into the West-dominated international order due to the ideological incompatibility between autocracy and democracy. Finally, the enormous power China had acquired in the post-Mao era thoroughly disrupted the military balance, commerce, and international governance. Even if China were a democracy, it would likely pursue self-interested policies that conflict with those of the West on many issues, as we have seen in the cases of India, Brazil, and South Africa.

始于2010年代末期、并在2022年俄罗斯入侵乌克兰后升级的中美“核战争”，将世界拖入了大国对抗的又一个黑暗时代，并重新唤起了拥有核武器的敌对双方之间战争的阴影。未来的历史学家无疑会就“核战争”的起因展开辩论。我们对后毛泽东时代中国政治经济发展的分析，对“核战争”是否不可避免提出了更为细致的结论。一方面，中国融入西方主导的国际秩序的可能性显然很小，因为中国领导人始终认为这种秩序不合法、不公正。一党专政的性质也意味着，由于专制与民主在意识形态上的不相容性，将一个由中共统治的中国完全融入西方主导的国际秩序几乎是不可能的。最后，中国在后毛泽东时代获得的巨大实力彻底扰乱了军事平衡、贸易和国际治理格局。即使中国是一个民主国家，它也可能会在许多问题上奉行与西方相冲突的利己政策，正如我们在印度、巴西和南非的例子中看到的那样。

Although the rise of China as a superpower would almost certainly result in unprecedented geopolitical and economic disruptions, it would be an exaggeration to say that China's arrival as the world's new superpower would trigger a NCW. Human agency—specifically individual leaders and their policies—also played a critical role in starting the NCW. Most crucially, Xi Jinping's aggressive foreign policy made the West's engagement with China untenable. Had a different Chinese leader succeeded Hu Jintao, the country's foreign policy might have continued to be assertive, but it unlikely would have been as reckless, risky, and confrontational as the foreign policy adopted by Xi during his first term. On the side of the West, the rise of America's far-right populist leader Donald Trump and the trade war he launched also helped set off a new cold war. Had Hillary Clinton won the US presidential election in 2016, Washington would almost certainly have adopted a tougher China policy, but a precipitous descent into an NCW would have been much less likely as her administration would most probably have pursued a more incremental policy of strategic competition, leaving room for de-escalation and compromise. Furthermore, Trump's escalation of confrontation with China in 2020 after the outbreak of the Covid-19 pandemic created a new political reality and virtually eliminated any possibility of building a new foundation for US-China relations to reverse the course of a new cold war.

尽管中国崛起为超级大国几乎必然会导致前所未有的地缘政治和经济动荡，但若说中国成为世界新超级大国会引发新冷战则未免言过其实。人为因素——特别是个别领导人及其政策——在新冷战的爆发中也发挥了关键作用。其中最关键的是，习近平咄咄逼人的外交政策使得西方与中国的关系难以维系。如果胡锦涛之后是另一位中国领导人，中国的外交政策或许仍会保持强硬姿态，但不太可能像习近平第一任期内那样鲁莽、冒险且充满对抗性。在西方方面，美国极右翼民粹主义领导人唐纳德·特朗普的崛起及其发起的贸易战也助长了新冷战的爆发。如果希拉里·克林顿在2016年赢得美国总统大选，华盛顿几乎肯定会采取更强硬的对华政策，但迅速陷入新冷战的可能性要小得多，因为她的政府很可能会奉行更为渐进的战略竞争政策，为缓和局势和达成妥协留出空间。此外，特朗普在2020年新冠疫情爆发后升级对华对抗，创造了新的政治现实，几乎彻底断绝了美中关系重建、扭转新冷战局面的任何可能性。





The End of the China Dream





中国梦的终结


Immediately after he became CCP chief in November 2012, Xi Jinping revived the decade-old party slogan "the great rejuvenation of the Chinese nation" and relabeled it as the "China dream." Although he has frequently invoked the "China dream" in his speeches, he has never precisely defined its meaning.1

习近平于2012年11月就任中共中央总书记后，立即重拾了十年前的党纲“中华民族伟大复兴”，并将其重新命名为“中国梦”。尽管他经常在讲话中提及“中国梦”，但他从未对其含义做出过明确的定义。

Judging by his post-2012 policies to realize his vision, it is reasonable to conclude that Xi's dream is to turn a CCP-led China into a global superpower on an equal footing with the United States. His record in fulfilling this dream after more than a decade in power, however, shows that he is failing more than he is succeeding. Despite his political ruthlessness and his success in amassing power and making himself the most powerful ruler since Mao Zedong, Xi's policies have put his "China dream" into serious long-term jeopardy. At home, he has all but ensured a destabilizing succession struggle after he departs from the political scene. His personalistic rule has made policymaking both over-centralized and prone to costly errors (as revealed most prominently in the case of his zero-Covid policy in 2022). The revival of the permanent purge is terrorizing the party and most likely traumatizing and alienating those elites who do not have any direct personal connections to Xi or to his faction. Similarly, his crackdown on the private sector has estranged and disillusioned China's private entrepreneurs, the group the party had previously courted. Economically, stagnation looms on the horizon. With the bursting of the real estate bubble, the record-high debt burden, and the demographic catastrophe for which the CCP's "one-child policy" is largely responsible, in the foreseeable future the Chinese economy will be struggling to regain its former dynamism. The decoupling of trade and investment from the West, a process initiated by the United States but later reinforced by Xi's agenda of securitizing the Chinese economy, will significantly hurt China's economic development as the country loses access to Western markets, capital, and advanced technology. Geopolitically, the NCW has sparked an open-ended and dangerous confrontation between China and the United States, endangering not only China's national security but also the CCP's own survival.

从习近平2012年之后为实现其愿景而推行的政策来看，他的梦想是将中共领导下的中国打造成为与美国平起平坐的全球超级大国，这一结论不无道理。然而，执政十余年后，他在实现这一梦想方面的表现却表明，他失败的次数远多于成功的次数。尽管习近平政治手段强硬，成功攫取权力，成为毛泽东以来最有权势的统治者，但他的政策却使他的“中国梦”面临严重的长期风险。在国内，他几乎已经确保了自己卸任后将面临一场破坏稳定的权力交接斗争。他的个人主义统治使得政策制定过度集中，且极易犯下代价高昂的错误（2022年他推行的“零新冠”政策便是最好的例证）。永久清洗的复兴令党内士气低落，并很可能给那些与习近平或其派系没有直接私人关系的精英阶层造成创伤和疏离。同样，他对私营部门的打压疏远并令中国民营企业家感到失望，而这原本是中共曾极力争取支持的群体。经济方面，停滞的阴影正在逼近。随着房地产泡沫破裂、创纪录的债务负担以及中共“独生子女政策”造成的人口灾难，在可预见的未来，中国经济将难以重拾昔日活力。贸易和投资与西方脱钩——这一进程最初由美国发起，后因习近平推行的中国经济证券化政策而得到强化——将严重损害中国经济发展，因为中国将失去进入西方市场、获取资本和先进技术的渠道。地缘政治方面，新一轮战争引发了中美之间旷日持久且危险的对抗，不仅危及中国的国家安全，也威胁着中共自身的生存。

Few should lament that Xi's version of a "China dream" will not be fulfilled. The tragedy brought about by the return to totalitarian rule and the outbreak of the new cold war under his rule is that the real China dream—an economically prosperous and politically liberal and open China—will be beyond the reach of its people for at least another generation.

很少有人会为习近平版本的“中国梦”无法实现而感到惋惜。在他统治下，中国回归极权统治并爆发新冷战，这带来的悲剧在于，真正的中国梦——一个经济繁荣、政治自由开放的中国——至少在未来一代人的时间内，都将遥不可及。





ACKNOWLEDGMENTS





致谢


THE BROKEN China Dream is a brief account of political and economic developments in post-Mao China. It is also a compressed intellectual journey of its author. China opened its door to the outside world when I was a college student in Shanghai. The US-China engagement that began with the normalization of relations in 1979 made it possible for me to come to the United States and study political science. My first book, From Reform to Revolution: The Demise of Communism in China and the Soviet Union (1994), was an optimistic assessment of Deng Xiaoping's reform. Its key theoretical assumption, based on the modernization theory, was that capitalist economic development could undermine the power of the Chinese Communist Party and create favorable conditions for a potential democratic transition. But as I gained greater intellectual maturity and a deeper understanding of the predatory nature of autocracy, I came to realize that Deng's neo-authoritarian developmentalism would be a dead end. This intellectual awakening inspired my second book, China's Trapped Transition: The Limits of Developmental Autocracy (2006). Published ahead of its time, this book laid out the logic of a "trapped transition," arguing that the CCP would lose incentives to pursue fundamental economic reforms and preside over a stagnating economy in the foreseeable future. My third book, China's Crony Capitalism: The Dynamics of Regime Decay (2016), details the pathologies of neo-authoritarian rule in the post-Tiananmen era. The Broken China Dream thus represents a synthesis of my research on post-Mao China over the last three decades.

《破碎的中国梦》简要记述了后毛泽东时代中国的政治和经济发展，同时也是作者个人思想历程的浓缩。我在上海读大学时，中国向世界敞开了大门。1979年中美关系正常化后，两国关系的密切接触使我得以赴美学习政治学。我的第一本书《从改革到革命：中国和苏联共产主义的终结》（1994）对邓小平的改革持乐观态度。其核心理论假设基于现代化理论，认为资本主义经济发展可以削弱中国共产党的权力，并为潜在的民主转型创造有利条件。但随着我思想日渐成熟，对专制统治的掠夺性本质有了更深刻的理解，我逐渐意识到邓小平的新威权发展主义是一条死路。这种思想觉醒促成了我的第二本书《中国转型困境：发展型专制的局限性》（2006）的出版。本书出版于时代之前，阐述了“转型困境”的逻辑，认为中共将失去推行根本性经济改革的动力，并在可预见的未来维持经济停滞。我的第三本书《中国的裙带资本主义：政权衰败的动力》（2016）详细分析了后天安门时代新威权统治的弊病。《破碎的中国梦》因此成为我过去三十年来对后毛泽东时代中国研究的综合之作。

I am deeply indebted to many colleagues in writing this book. Bridget Flannery-McCoy and Eric Crahan at Princeton University Press first planted the idea for this book in 2020 and provided invaluable advice and encouragement. A grant from the Smith Richardson Foundation enabled me to take a sabbatical to write the first draft in 2022-2023. I am especially grateful to the support of Marin Strmecki and Allan Song of the foundation for their enthusiasm for the project. I want to thank Hilary Appel for giving me a book subvention grant from the Keck Center for International and Strategic Studies at Claremont McKenna College. Nancy Hearst proofread and polished the manuscript with unrivaled editing skills.

在本书的写作过程中，我衷心感谢众多同事的帮助。普林斯顿大学出版社的布里奇特·弗兰纳里-麦考伊和埃里克·克拉汉于2020年首次提出本书的构想，并给予了我宝贵的建议和鼓励。史密斯·理查森基金会的资助使我得以在2022-2023年间休假，完成初稿。我尤其感谢基金会的马林·斯特梅基和艾伦·宋对本项目的热情支持。我还要感谢克莱蒙特麦肯纳学院凯克国际与战略研究中心的希拉里·阿佩尔女士为我提供的图书资助。南希·赫斯特女士以其精湛的编辑技艺对书稿进行了校对和润色。

Andy Walder, Guoguang Wu, and Patricia Thornton read the drafts of the book and offered helpful guidance. I also benefited from the constructive comments of two anonymous readers. Celine Wang, my able and diligent research assistant, deserves the credit for checking and standardizing the notes.

Andy Walder、吴国光和Patricia Thornton审阅了本书的草稿，并提供了宝贵的指导。两位匿名读者的建设性意见也让我受益匪浅。我勤奋能干的研究助理Celine Wang功不可没，她负责检查和整理笔记。

This book is dedicated to Larry Diamond, a dear friend and generous mentor who has been a source of intellectual inspiration for more than three decades.

本书献给拉里·戴蒙德，他是一位亲爱的朋友和慷慨的导师，三十多年来一直是我的精神支柱。





NOTES





笔记





Introduction





介绍


1 Agnes Chang et al., "What Happened to Hu Jintao," New York Times, October 27, 2022, https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2022/10/27/world/asia/hu-jintao-congress-videos.html.

1 Agnes Chang 等人，“胡锦涛发生了什么事”，《纽约时报》，2022 年 10 月 27 日，https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2022/10/27/world/asia/hu-jintao-congress-videos.html。

2 Zhong Yuhao, “中纪委公布十八大以来被查的中央委员、中央候补委员人数”[The Central Commission for Discipline Inspection announces the number of Central Committee members and alternate members who have been investigated since the Eighteenth National Party Congress], The Paper, October 17, 2022, https://m.thepaper.cn/newsDetail_forward_20332452.

2 Zhong Yuhao, “中纪委公布十八大以来被查的中央委员、中央候补委员人数”[The Central Commission for Discipline Inspection announces the number of Central Committee members and alternate members who have been investigated since the Eighteenth National Party Congress], The Paper, October 17, 2022, https://m.thepaper.cn/newsDetail_forward_20332452.

3 Calculated from data in the Statistical Yearbook of China 2013 (Beijing: Zhongguo tongji chubanshe, 2014), https://www.stats.gov.cn/sj/ndsj/.

3 根据《中国统计年鉴2013》（北京：中国统计出版社，2014年）中的数据计算得出，https://www.stats.gov.cn/sj/ndsj/。

4 World Bank, "GDP per Capita, PPP (current international $)—China," https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.PP.CD?locations=CN.

4 世界银行，“人均GDP，购买力平价（当前国际美元）—中国”，https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.PP.CD?locations=CN。

5 Statistical Yearbook of China 2013.

5.《中国统计年鉴2013》。

6 Statistical Yearbook of China 1995 (Beijing: Zhongguo tongji chubanshe, 1996), 588; Statistical Yearbook of China 2013.

6 中国统计年鉴 1995 年（北京：中国统计出版社，1996 年），588；中国统计年鉴 2013 年。

7 Calculated from Statistical Yearbook of China 2013; Statistical Yearbook of China 1995, 537.

7 根据《中国统计年鉴2013》和《中国统计年鉴1995》计算得出，第537页。

8 Seymour Martin Lipset, "Some Social Requisites of Democracy: Economic Development and Political Legitimacy," American Political Science Review 53, no. 1 (1959): 69-105; Robert A. Dahl, Polyarchy: Participation and Opposition (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1971).

8 Seymour Martin Lipset，“民主的一些社会要求：经济发展和政治合法性”，《美国政治科学评论》53，第 1 期（1959 年）：69-105；Robert A. Dahl，《多元政体：参与和反对》（纽黑文，康涅狄格州：耶鲁大学出版社，1971 年）。

9 Barbara Geddes, "What Causes Democratization," in The Oxford Handbook of Political Science, ed. Robert Goodin (New York: Oxford University Press, 2013), 593-615.

9 Barbara Geddes，“民主化的原因是什么”，载于 Robert Goodin 编辑的《牛津政治学手册》（纽约：牛津大学出版社，2013 年），第 593-615 页。

10 Guillermo O'Donnell and Philippe C. Schmitter, Transitions from Authoritarian Rule: Tentative Conclusions About Uncertain Democracies (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1986); Samuel P. Huntington, The Third Wave: Democratization in the Late Twentieth Century (Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1991); Stephan Haggard and Robert R. Kaufman, Dictators and Democrats: Masses, Elites, and Regime Change (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2016), 142-72.

10 Guillermo O'Donnell 和 Philippe C. Schmitter，《从威权统治过渡：关于不确定民主的初步结论》（巴尔的摩：约翰·霍普金斯大学出版社，1986 年）；Samuel P. Huntington，《第三波：二十世纪后期的民主化》（诺曼：俄克拉荷马大学出版社，1991 年）；Stephan Haggard 和 Robert R. Kaufman，《独裁者和民主人士：群众、精英和政权更迭》（普林斯顿，新泽西州：普林斯顿大学出版社，2016 年），第 142-172 页。

11 Adam Przeworski and Fernando Limongi, "Modernization: Theories and Facts," World Politics 49, no. 2 (1997): 155-83.

11 Adam Przeworski 和 Fernando Limongi，“现代化：理论与事实”，《世界政治》49，第 2 期（1997 年）：155-83。

12 邓小平 [Deng Xiaoping], “坚持四项基本原则” [Maintain the four cardinal principles], in 邓小平文选第二卷 [Selected works of Deng Xiaoping, vol. 2] (Beijing: People's Press, 1994), 164-65.

12 邓小平 [Deng Xiaoping], “坚持四项基本原则” [Maintain the four cardinal principles], in 邓小平文选第二卷 [Selected works of Deng Xiaoping, vol. 2] (Beijing: People's Press, 1994), 164-65.

13 Wu Guoguang, 趣紫陽與政治改革 [Zhao Ziyang and political reform] (Hong Kong: Taipingyang shiji yanjiusuo, 1997).

13 吴国光，趣紫阳与政治改革[赵紫阳与政治改革]（香港：太平洋世纪研究所，1997）。

14 Bruce J. Dickson, The Dictator's Dilemma: The Chinese Communist Party's Strategy for Survival (New York: Oxford University Press, 2016); David L. Shambaugh, China's Communist Party: Atrophy and Adaptation (Berkeley: University of California Press, and Washington, DC: Woodrow Wilson Center Press, 2008); Dimitar D. Gueorguiev, Retrofitting Leninism: Participation Without Democracy in China (New York: Oxford University Press, 2021).

14 Bruce J. Dickson，《独裁者的困境：中国共产党的生存战略》（纽约：牛津大学出版社，2016 年）；David L. Shambaugh，《中国共产党：衰落与适应》（伯克利：加州大学出版社，华盛顿特区：伍德罗·威尔逊中心出版社，2008 年）；Dimitar D. Gueorguiev，《改造列宁主义：中国没有民主的参与》（纽约：牛津大学出版社，2021 年）。

15 Suisheng Zhao, A Nation-State by Construction: Dynamics of Modern Chinese Nationalism (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2004); Zheng Wang, Never Forget National Humiliation: Historical Memory in Chinese Politics and Foreign Relations (New York: Columbia University Press, 2012).

15 赵穗生，《建构的民族国家：现代中国民族主义的动力》（斯坦福，加州：斯坦福大学出版社，2004 年）；王铮，《永不忘记民族耻辱：中国政治和外交关系中的历史记忆》（纽约：哥伦比亚大学出版社，2012 年）。

16 Jie Chen and Bruce J. Dickson, Allies of the State: China's Private Entrepreneurs and Democratic Change (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2010).

16 Jie Chen 和 Bruce J. Dickson，《国家的盟友：中国的私营企业家和民主变革》（马萨诸塞州剑桥：哈佛大学出版社，2010 年）。

17 Yuhua Wang and Carl Minzner, "The Rise of the Chinese Security State," China Quarterly, no. 222 (2015): 339-59; Minxin Pei, The Sentinel State: Surveillance and the Survival of Dictatorship in China (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2024).

17 王玉华和卡尔·明兹纳，《中国安全国家的崛起》，《中国季刊》，第222期（2015年）：339-59；裴敏欣，《哨兵国家：监视与中国独裁政权的生存》（马萨诸塞州剑桥：哈佛大学出版社，2024年）。

18 Carl Friedrich and Zbigniew Brzezinski, "The General Characteristics of Totalitarian Dictatorship," in Comparative Government: A Reader, ed. Jean Blondel (London: Macmillan Education, 1969), 187-99; Juan J. Linz, Totalitarian and Authoritarian Regimes (Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, 2000).

18 Carl Friedrich 和 Zbigniew Brzezinski，“极权独裁的一般特征”，载 Jean Blondel 编，《比较政府：读本》（伦敦：麦克米伦教育出版社，1969 年），第 187-99 页；Juan J. Linz，《极权主义和专制政权》（科罗拉多州博尔德：Lynne Rienner 出版社，2000 年）。

19 Ivo Banac, ed., Eastern Europe in Revolution (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1992); Archie Brown, The Rise and Fall of Communism (New York: Ecco, 2011).

19 Ivo Banac 编，《革命中的东欧》（纽约州伊萨卡：康奈尔大学出版社，1992 年）；Archie Brown，《共产主义的兴衰》（纽约：Ecco 出版社，2011 年）。

20 Vladislav M. Zubok, Collapse: The Fall of the Soviet Union (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2021); Michael A. McFaul, Russia's Unfinished Revolution: Political Change from Gorbachev to Putin (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2002).

20 Vladislav M. Zubok，《崩溃：苏联的解体》（康涅狄格州纽黑文：耶鲁大学出版社，2021 年）；Michael A. McFaul，《俄罗斯未完成的革命：从戈尔巴乔夫到普京的政治变革》（纽约州伊萨卡：康奈尔大学出版社，2002 年）。

21 Martin K. Dimitrov, ed. Why Communism Did Not Collapse: Understanding Authoritarian Regime Resilience in Asia and Europe (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2013).

21 Martin K. Dimitrov 编。《共产主义为何没有崩溃：理解亚洲和欧洲的威权政权韧性》（纽约：剑桥大学出版社，2013 年）。

22 Jeffrey Sachs and Wing Thye Woo, "Structural Factors in the Economic Reforms of China, Eastern Europe, and the Former Soviet Union," Economic Policy 9, no. 18 (1994): 101-45.

22 Jeffrey Sachs 和 Wing Thye Woo，“中国、东欧和前苏联经济改革中的结构性因素”，《经济政策》9，第 18 期（1994 年）：101-45。

23 Yingyi Qian and Chenggang Xu, "The M-Form Hierarchy and China's Economic Reform," European Economic Review 37, no. 2-3 (1993): 541-48; Xueguang Zhou, The Logic of Governance in China: An Organizational Approach (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2022).

23 钱颖怡和徐成刚，《M 型层级结构与中国的经济改革》，《欧洲经济评论》37，第 2-3 期（1993 年）：541-48；周学光，《中国治理的逻辑：一种组织方法》（纽约：剑桥大学出版社，2022 年）。

24 Xin Yuan and Yuan Gao, "Demographic Transition and Economic Miracles in China: An Analysis Based on Demographic Perspective," International Journal of Economic Policy Studies 14, no. 1 (2020): 25-45.

24 袁欣、高媛，“中国的人口转型与经济奇迹：基于人口视角的分析”，《国际经济政策研究杂志》14，第1期（2020）：25-45。

25 Ezra F. Vogel, The Four Little Dragons: The Spread of Industrialization in East Asia (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1991).

25 Ezra F. Vogel，《四条小龙：工业化在东亚的传播》（马萨诸塞州剑桥：哈佛大学出版社，1991 年）。

26 Andrew G. Walder, "Bending the Arc of Chinese History: The Cultural Revolution's Paradoxical Legacy," China Quarterly, no. 227 (2016): 613-31.

26 Andrew G. Walder，“改变中国历史的弧线：文化大革命的悖论遗产”，《中国季刊》，第 227 期（2016 年）：613-31。

27 Steven Levitsky and Lucan Way, Revolution and Dictatorship: The Violent Origins of Durable Authoritarianism (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2022).

27 Steven Levitsky 和 Lucan Way，《革命与独裁：持久威权主义的暴力起源》（新泽西州普林斯顿：普林斯顿大学出版社，2022 年）。

28 Adam Tooze, The Wages of Destruction: The Making and Breaking of the Nazi Economy (New York: Penguin, 2008); Carl J. Friedrich and Zbigniew K. Brzezinski, Totalitarian Dictatorship and Autocracy (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1956).

28 Adam Tooze，《毁灭的代价：纳粹经济的建立与崩溃》（纽约：企鹅出版社，2008 年）；Carl J. Friedrich 和 Zbigniew K. Brzezinski，《极权独裁与专制》（马萨诸塞州剑桥：哈佛大学出版社，1956 年）。

29 Timothy Brook and B. Michael Frolic, eds., Civil Society in China (London: Routledge, 2015).

29 Timothy Brook 和 B. Michael Frolic 编，《中国的公民社会》（伦敦：Routledge，2015 年）。

30 Mancur Olson, "Dictatorship, Democracy, and Development," American Political Science Review 87, no. 3 (1993): 567-76; Daron Acemoglu et al., "Institutions as the Fundamental Cause of Long-Run Growth," in Handbook of Economic Growth: Volume 1A, ed. Steven N. Durlauf and Philippe Aghion (Elsevier, 2005), 385-472.

30 Mancur Olson，“独裁、民主与发展”，《美国政治科学评论》87，第 3 期（1993 年）：567-76；Daron Acemoglu 等人，“制度作为长期增长的根本原因”，载《经济增长手册》：第 1A 卷，Steven N. Durlauf 和 Philippe Aghion 编辑（Elsevier，2005 年），385-472。

31 Joel S. Hellman, "Winners Take All: The Politics of Partial Reform in Post-Communist Transitions," World Politics 50, no. 2 (1998): 203-34; Victor Shih, "Partial Reform Equilibrium, Chinese Style: Political Incentives and Reform Stagnation in Chinese Financial Policies," Comparative Political Studies 40, no. 10 (2007): 1238-62.

31 Joel S. Hellman，“赢家通吃：后共产主义转型中的部分改革政治”，《世界政治》50，第 2 期（1998 年）：203-34；Victor Shih，“中国式的部分改革均衡：中国金融政策中的政治激励和改革停滞”，《比较政治研究》40，第 10 期（2007 年）：1238-62。

32 Minxin Pei, China's Crony Capitalism: The Dynamics of Regime Decay (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2016); Andrew Wedeman, "The Dynamics and Trajectory of Corruption in Contemporary China," China Review 22, no. 2 (2022): 21-48.

32 裴敏欣，《中国的裙带资本主义：政权衰落的动力》（马萨诸塞州剑桥：哈佛大学出版社，2016 年）；安德鲁·韦德曼，“当代中国腐败的动力和轨迹”，《中国评论》22，第 2 期（2022 年）：21-48。

33 "Neo-authoritarianism" here refers to a unique variety of autocracy that seeks to accelerate economic development under authoritarian rule. Historically, South Korea, Taiwan, Singapore, and Chile under Pinochet are classical examples of this type of regime. Deng Xiaoping's vision of economic modernization is, in essence, neo-authoritarian. "Neo-Stalinism" can be defined as a form of totalitarianism that adopts the institutional and political practices characteristic of Stalinist Soviet Union, such as the dominance of an individual dictator, a cult of personality, the use of purges to terrorize the party, conformity to an official ideology, and strict social control. This form of totalitarianism differs from Maoist mass totalitarianism in the dictator's preferred instrument of terror. Neo-Stalinist regimes rely on the coercive apparatus of the state to maintain the rule of fear while Maoist regimes prefer the mobilization of the masses to carry out terror campaigns.

33 此处的“新威权主义”指的是一种独特的专制政体，它试图在威权统治下加速经济发展。历史上，韩国、台湾、新加坡以及皮诺切特统治下的智利都是此类政权的典型例子。邓小平的经济现代化愿景本质上也是新威权主义的。“新斯大林主义”可以定义为一种极权主义形式，它采纳了斯大林时期苏联的制度和政治实践，例如个人独裁者的统治、个人崇拜、利用清洗来恐吓党员、对官方意识形态的服从以及严格的社会控制。这种极权主义与毛泽东时代的群众极权主义的区别在于独裁者所偏好的恐怖手段。新斯大林主义政权依靠国家强制机器来维持恐惧统治，而毛泽东政权则倾向于动员群众来实施恐怖运动。





Chapter 1. The Decisive Decade





第一章 决定性的十年


1 Andres Onate, "Hua Kuo-Feng and the Arrest of the Gang of Four," China Quarterly, no. 75 (1978): 540-65.

1 Andres Onate，“华国锋与四人帮的逮捕”，《中国季刊》，第 75 期（1978 年）：540-65。

2 Leng Rong and Wang Zuoling, eds., 邓小平年谱 (1975-1997) [Deng Xiaoping chronology (1975-1997)] (Beijing: Zhongyang wenxian chubanshe, 2004), 156-57; Ezra Vogel, Deng Xiaoping and the Transformation of China (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2011), 190-200.

2 冷荣、王作凌编，《邓小平年谱（1975-1997）》（北京：中央文研出版社，2004 年），156-157 页；埃兹拉·沃格尔，《邓小平与中国的转型》（马萨诸塞州剑桥：哈佛大学出版社贝尔纳普出版社，2011 年），190-200 页。

3 Roderick MacFarquhar, "The Succession to Mao and the End of Maoism," in The Politics of China: Sixty Years of the People's Republic of China, 3rd ed., ed. Roderick MacFarquhar (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2011), 246-336.

3 Roderick MacFarquhar，“毛泽东的继承和毛泽东思想的终结”，载《中国政治：中华人民共和国六十年》，第3版，Roderick MacFarquhar 编（纽约：剑桥大学出版社，2011 年），第 246-336 页。

4 Robert L. Suettinger, The Conscience of the Party: Hu Yaobang, China's Communist Reformer (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2024).

4 Robert L. Suettinger，《党的良心：胡耀邦，中国的共产主义改革家》（马萨诸塞州剑桥：哈佛大学出版社，2024 年）。

5 Michael Schoenhals, "The 1978 Truth Criterion Controversy," China Quarterly, no. 126 (1991): 243-68.

5 Michael Schoenhals，“1978 年真理标准之争”，《中国季刊》，第 126 期（1991 年）：243-68。

6 David L. Shambaugh, The Making of a Premier: Zhao Ziyang's Provincial Career (London: Routledge, 2019).

6 David L. Shambaugh，《总理的养成：赵紫阳的省级生涯》（伦敦：Routledge出版社，2019年）。

7 Yang Jisheng, 中国改革年代的政治斗争 [Political struggles in China's reform era] (Hong Kong: Excellent Culture Press, 2004), 11-14.

7 Yang Jisheng, 中国改革年代的政治斗争 [Political struggles in China's reform era] (Hong Kong: Excellent Culture Press, 2004), 11-14.

8 Zhao Ziyang, 改革历程 [The course of reform] (Hong Kong: New Century, 2009), 241.

8 Zhao Ziyang, 改革历程 [The course of reform] (Hong Kong: New Century, 2009), 241.

9 Yang Jisheng, 中国改革年代的政治斗争, 16-17.

9 Yang Jisheng, 中国改革年代的政治斗争, 16-17.

10 Deng Xiaoping, "On the Reform of the System of Party and State Leadership," August 18, 1980, in Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping (1975-1982) (Beijing: Foreign Languages Press, 1984), 302-25.

10 邓小平，《论党和国家领导体制改革》，1980年8月18日，载《邓小平选集（1975-1982）》（北京：外文出版社，1984年），第302-325页。

11 Deng Xiaoping,323.

11 Deng Xiaoping,323.

12 Deng Xiaoping, 324.

12 Deng Xiaoping, 324.

13 “关于党内政治生活的若干准则”[Some guidelines on political life within the party],人民网 [People's daily online], February 29, 1980, http://dangjian.people.com.cn/GB/136058/427510/428086/428088/428312/index.html.

13 “关于党内政治生活的若干准则”[Some guidelines on political life within the party],人民网 [People's daily online], February 29, 1980, http://dangjian.people.com.cn/GB/136058/427510/428086/428088/428312/index.html.

14 Melanie Manion, Retirement of Revolutionaries in China: Public Policies, Social Norms, Private Interests (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1993).

14 Melanie Manion，《中国革命者的退休：公共政策、社会规范、私人利益》（新泽西州普林斯顿：普林斯顿大学出版社，1993 年）。

15 中共中央关于建立老干部退休制度的决定（1982年2月20日）[Decision of the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party on establishing a retirement system for veteran cadres (February 20, 1982)], http://cpc.people.com.cn/BIG5/64162/71380/71387/71591/4854975.html.

15 中共中央关于建立老干部退休制度的决定（1982年2月20日）[Decision of the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party on establishing a retirement system for veteran cadres (February 20, 1982)], http://cpc.people.com.cn/BIG5/64162/71380/71387/71591/4854975.html.

16 中国人大制度理论研究会，“彭真在主持起草1982宪法的那些日子里”[The days when Peng Zhen presided over the drafting of the 1982 constitution], 中国人大网 [China National People's Congress network], June 3, 2016, http://www.npc.gov.cn/zgrdw/npc/bmzz/llyjh/2016-06/03/content_1990992.htm.

16 中国人大制度理论研究会，“彭真在主持起草1982宪法的那些日子里”[The days when Peng Zhen presided over the drafting of the 1982 constitution], 中国人大网 [China National People's Congress network], June 3, 2016, http://www.npc.gov.cn/zgrdw/npc/bmzz/llyjh/2016-06/03/content_1990992.htm.

17 Yang Jisheng, 中国改革年代的政治斗争, 343.

17 Yang Jisheng, 中国改革年代的政治斗争, 343.

18 Zhao Ziyang, 改革历程, 190-91.

18 Zhao Ziyang, 改革历程, 190-91.

19 Douglass North and Barry R. Weingast, "Constitutions and Commitment: The Evolution of Institutions Governing Public Choice in Seventeenth-Century England," Journal of Economic History 49, no. 4 (1989): 803-32.

19 Douglass North 和 Barry R. Weingast，“宪法与承诺：十七世纪英国公共选择制度的演变”，《经济史杂志》49，第 4 期（1989 年）：803-32。

20 Zhao Ziyang, 改革历程, 99; David Bachman, “Differing Visions of China's Post-Mao Economy: The Ideas of Chen Yun, Deng Xiaoping, and Zhao Ziyang,” Asian Survey 26, no. 3 (1986): 292-321.

20 赵紫阳，《铁路》，99；David Bachman，“中国后毛泽东时代经济的不同愿景：陈云、邓小平和赵紫阳的思想”，《亚洲研究》26，第3期（1986年）：292-321。

21 Zhu Jiamu, ed., 陈云年谱(下) [Chen Yun chronology] [Beijing: Zhongyang wenxian chubanshe, 2000), 316; Leng and Wang, 邓小平年谱, 948.

21 Zhu Jiamu, ed., 陈云年谱(下) [Chen Yun chronology] [Beijing: Zhongyang wenxian chubanshe, 2000), 316; Leng and Wang, 邓小平年谱, 948.

22 Zhao Ziyang, 改革历程, 119, 136-38.

22 Zhao Ziyang, 改革历程, 119, 136-38.

23 Zhu Jiamu, 陈云年谱 (下), 309. Chen made this analogy in November 1982.

23 Zhu Jiamu, 陈云年谱 (下), 309. Chen made this analogy in November 1982.

24 Yang Jisheng, 中国改革年代的政治斗争, 193-95; Leng and Wang, 邓小平年谱, 1006.

24 Yang Jisheng, 中国改革年代的政治斗争, 193-95; Leng and Wang, 邓小平年谱, 1006.

25 Zhu Jiamu, 陈云年谱（下）, 238-39, 262-65, 288-90.

25 Zhu Jiamu, 陈云年谱（下）, 238-39, 262-65, 288-90.

26 Zhao Ziyang, 改革历程, 110-11, 119.

26 Zhao Ziyang, 改革历程, 110-11, 119.

27 Leng and Wang, 邓小平年谱, 516; Yang Jisheng, 中国改革年代的政治斗争, 236-38.

27 Leng and Wang, 邓小平年谱, 516; Yang Jisheng, 中国改革年代的政治斗争, 236-38.

28 Leng and Wang, 邓小平年谱, 954, 963.

28 Leng and Wang, 邓小平年谱, 954, 963.

29 Leng and Wang, 1008.

29 Leng 和 Wang，1008。

30 Zhao Ziyang, 改革历程, 102.

30 Zhao Ziyang, 改革历程, 102.

31 Zhu Jiamu, 陈云年谱 (下), 263-64, 290, 340.

31 Zhu Jiamu, 陈云年谱 (下), 263-64, 290, 340.

32 ZhuJiamu,339.

32 ZhuJiamu,339.

33 Zhao Ziyang, 改革历程, 110.

33 Zhao Ziyang, 改革历程, 110.

34 Yang Jisheng, 中国改革年代的政治斗争, 341-42.

34 Yang Jisheng, 中国改革年代的政治斗争, 341-42.

35 Donald Clarke, "Legislating for a Market Economy in China," China Quarterly, no. 191 (2007): 567-85.

35 Donald Clarke，“为中国市场经济立法”，《中国季刊》，第 191 期（2007 年）：567-85。

36 Pitman Potter et al., eds., Domestic Law Reforms in Post-Mao China (Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe, 1994).

36 Pitman Potter 等人编，《后毛泽东时代中国的国内法律改革》（纽约州阿蒙克：M. E. Sharpe，1994 年）。

37 Kenneth Lieberthal and David M. Lampton, eds., Bureaucracy, Politics, and Decision Making in Post-Mao China (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992); Donald Clarke, "The Execution of Civil Judgments in China," China Quarterly, no. 141 (1995): 65-81.

37 Kenneth Lieberthal 和 David M. Lampton 编，《后毛泽东时代的中国官僚机构、政治和决策》（伯克利：加州大学出版社，1992 年）；Donald Clarke，“中国民事判决的执行”，《中国季刊》，第 141 期（1995 年）：65-81。

38 Stanely Lubman, Bird in a Cage: Legal Reform in China After Mao (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1999).

38 斯坦利·卢布曼，《笼中鸟：毛泽东之后中国的法律改革》（斯坦福，加利福尼亚州：斯坦福大学出版社，1999 年）。

39 Murray Scot Tanner, The Politics of Lawmaking in Post-Mao China: Institutions, Processes, and Democratic Prospects (New York: Oxford University Press, 1999).

39 Murray Scot Tanner，《后毛泽东时代中国的立法政治：制度、过程和民主前景》（纽约：牛津大学出版社，1999 年）。

40 Zhao Ziyang, 改革历程, 243-44.

40 Zhao Ziyang, 改革历程, 243-44.

41 Deng Xiaoping, “Remarks on the Domestic Economic Situation,” June 10, 1986, in Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping (1975-1982), 163; 邓小平文选，第三卷（Beijing: Renmin chubanshe, 1993), 160.

41 Deng Xiaoping, “Remarks on the Domestic Economic Situation,” June 10, 1986, in Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping (1975-1982), 163; 邓小平文选，第三卷（Beijing: Renmin chubanshe, 1993), 160.

42 Zhao Ziyang, 改革历程, 236-37.

42 Zhao Ziyang, 改革历程, 236-37.

43 Zhao Ziyang, 243-44, 251-52.

43 Zhao Ziyang, 243-44, 251-52.

44 Zhao Ziyang,237-39.

44 Zhao Ziyang,237-39.

45 Wu Guoguang, 赵紫阳与政治改革 [Zhao Ziyang and political reform] (Taipei: Yuanjing chuban shiye gongsi, 1997); Wu Wei, 中国80年代政治改革的台前幕后 [Behind the scenes of China's political reforms in the 1980s] (Hong Kong: New Century, 2013). The two best books on how Zhao led this project of political reform are by two participants.

45 Wu Guoguang, 赵紫阳与政治改革 [Zhao Ziyang and political reform] (Taipei: Yuanjing chuban shiye gongsi, 1997); Wu Wei, 中国80年代政治改革的台前幕后 [Behind the scenes of China's political reforms in the 1980s] (Hong Kong: New Century, 2013). The two best books on how Zhao led this project of political reform are by two participants.

46 Wu Wei,中国80年代政治改革的台前幕后

46 Wu Wei,中国80年代政治改革的台前幕后

47 Wu Wei.

47 Wu Wei.

48 Wu Wei, “邓小平谈不要照搬三权分立” [Deng Xiaoping discusses not blindly copying the separation of powers], 纽约时报中文网 [New York Times Chinese website], July 7, 2014, https://cn.nytimes.com/china/20140707/cc07wuwei19/.

48 Wu Wei, “邓小平谈不要照搬三权分立” [Deng Xiaoping discusses not blindly copying the separation of powers], 纽约时报中文网 [New York Times Chinese website], July 7, 2014, https://cn.nytimes.com/china/20140707/cc07wuwei19/.

49 Wu Wei, “邓小平就是中国最大的实际” [Deng Xiaoping epitomizes the practical side of China], 纽约时报中文网 [New York Times Chinese website], July 14, 2014, https://cn.nytimes.com/china/20140714/cc14wuwei20/.

49 Wu Wei, “邓小平就是中国最大的实际” [Deng Xiaoping epitomizes the practical side of China], 纽约时报中文网 [New York Times Chinese website], July 14, 2014, https://cn.nytimes.com/china/20140714/cc14wuwei20/.

50 Wu Wei, “政改总体设想艰难过关” [The overall political reform plan faces formidable challenges], 纽约时报中文网 [New York Times Chinese website], July 21, 2014, https://cn.nytimes.com/china/20140721/cc21wuwei/.

50 Wu Wei, “政改总体设想艰难过关” [The overall political reform plan faces formidable challenges], 纽约时报中文网 [New York Times Chinese website], July 21, 2014, https://cn.nytimes.com/china/20140721/cc21wuwei/.

51 Wu Wei, “邓小平谈不要照搬三权分立”; Wu Wei, “邓小平就是中国最大的实际”

51 Wu Wei, “邓小平谈不要照搬三权分立”; Wu Wei, “邓小平就是中国最大的实际”

52 Wu Wei, “选举制度改革：十三大后的探索” (Exploration into the reform of the electoral system after the Thirteenth Party Congress), 纽约时报中文网 [New York Times Chinese website], September 15, 2014, https://cn.nytimes.com/china/20140915/cc15wuwei29/.

52 Wu Wei, “选举制度改革：十三大后的探索” (Exploration into the reform of the electoral system after the Thirteenth Party Congress), 纽约时报中文网 [New York Times Chinese website], September 15, 2014, https://cn.nytimes.com/china/20140915/cc15wuwei29/.

53 Wu Wei, “十三大后的党政分开改革” [Reform of separation of the functions of party and government after the Thirteenth National Congress], 纽约时报中文网 [New York Times Chinese website], September 30, 2014, https://cn.nytimes.com/china/20140930/cc30wuwei31/.

53 Wu Wei, “十三大后的党政分开改革” [Reform of separation of the functions of party and government after the Thirteenth National Congress], 纽约时报中文网 [New York Times Chinese website], September 30, 2014, https://cn.nytimes.com/china/20140930/cc30wuwei31/.

54 Wu Wei.

54 Wu Wei.

55 Michael S. Duke, Blooming and Contending: Chinese Literature in the Post-Mao Era (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1985).

55 Michael S. Duke，《绽放与竞争：后毛泽东时代的中国文学》（布卢明顿：印第安纳大学出版社，1985 年）。

56 周杨 [Zhou Yang], “关于马克思主义的几个理论问题的探讨” [Exploring several theoretical issues of Marxism], 人民日报 [People's daily], March 16, 1983, https://www.sxlib.org.cn/dfzy/rwk/bqzmkjwwrw/zy/qwts/zywlx/201707/t20170719_837392.html; Bill Brugger, “Alienation Revisited,” Australian Journal of Chinese Affairs 12 (1984): 143-51.

56 周杨 [Zhou Yang], “关于马克思主义的几个理论问题的探讨” [Exploring several theoretical issues of Marxism], 人民日报 [People's daily], March 16, 1983, https://www.sxlib.org.cn/dfzy/rwk/bqzmkjwwrw/zy/qwts/zywlx/201707/t20170719_837392.html; Bill Brugger, “Alienation Revisited,” Australian Journal of Chinese Affairs 12 (1984): 143-51.

57 Jing Wang, High Culture Fever: Politics, Aesthetics, and Ideology in Deng's China (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1996); Xudong Zhang, "On Some Motifs in the Chinese 'Cultural Fever' of the Late 1980s: Social Change, Ideology, and Theory," Social Text 39 (1994): 129-56.

57 王静，《高雅文化热：邓小平时代的中国的政治、美学和意识形态》（伯克利：加州大学出版社，1996 年）；张旭东，《论 20 世纪 80 年代末中国“文化热”中的一些主题：社会变迁、意识形态和理论》，《社会文本》39（1994 年）：129-56。

58 Alice de Jong, "The Denise of the Dragon: Backgrounds to the Chinese Film 'River Elegy'," China Information 4, no. 3 (1989): 28-43.

58 Alice de Jong，“龙之丹妮丝：中国电影《江之挽歌》的背景”，中国信息 4，第 3 期（1989 年）：28-43。

59 Jilin Xu, Geremie R. Barmé, and Gloria Davies, "The Fate of an Enlightenment: Twenty Years in the Chinese Intellectual Sphere (1978-98)," in Chinese Intellectuals Between State and Market, ed. Edward X. Gu and Merle Goldman (London: RoutledgeCurzon, 2004), 183-203.

59 徐吉林、Geremie R. Barmé 和 Gloria Davies，“启蒙运动的命运：中国知识界的二十年（1978-98）”，载于 Edward X. Gu 和 Merle Goldman 编辑的《国家与市场之间的中国知识分子》（伦敦：RoutledgeCurzon，2004 年），第 183-203 页。

60 Dingxin Zhao, “Decline of Political Control in Chinese Universities and the Rise of the 1989 Chinese Student Movement,” Sociological Perspectives 40, no. 2 (1997): 159–82.

60 赵定新，“中国大学政治控制的衰落与1989年中国学生运动的兴起”，社会学视角40，第2期（1997年）：159-82。

61 Yang Jisheng, 中国改革年代的政治斗争

61 Yang Jisheng, 中国改革年代的政治斗争

62 Richard Baum, Burying Mao: Chinese Politics in the Age of Deng Xiaoping (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1994), 71-75, 80-83.

62 Richard Baum，《埋葬毛泽东：邓小平时代的中国政治》（新泽西州普林斯顿：普林斯顿大学出版社，1994 年），第 71-75 页，第 80-83 页。

63 邓小平 [Deng Xiaoping], “贯彻调整方针, 保证安定团结”[Implement policies of adjustment, safeguard stability and unity], in邓小平文选第二卷 [Selected works of Deng Xiaoping, vol. 2], 354-74.

63 邓小平 [Deng Xiaoping], “贯彻调整方针, 保证安定团结”[Implement policies of adjustment, safeguard stability and unity], in邓小平文选第二卷 [Selected works of Deng Xiaoping, vol. 2], 354-74.

64 “中共中央关于当前报刊新闻广播宣传方针的决定”[CCP Center's decision on propaganda policy for print and broadcast media], http://www.71.cn/2011/0930/632663.shtml.

64 “中共中央关于当前报刊新闻广播宣传方针的决定”[CCP Center's decision on propaganda policy for print and broadcast media], http://www.71.cn/2011/0930/632663.shtml.

65 邓小平[Deng Xiaoping]，“关于思想战线上的问题的讲话"(Speech on problems on the ideological front,"in邓小平文选第二卷[Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping,vol.2],389-93.

65 邓小平[Deng Xiaoping]，“关于思想战线上的问题的讲话"(Speech on problems on the ideological front,"in邓小平文选第二卷[Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping,vol.2],389-93.

66 Lin Mu, “胡耀邦抵制专制主义”[Hu Yaobang resists authoritarianism], in人民心中的胡耀邦 [Hu Yaobang in the people's hearts], ed. Su Shaozhi, Chen Yizi, and Gao Wenqian (Hong Kong, Mingjing chubanshe, 2006), 126-28.

66 Lin Mu, “胡耀邦抵制专制主义”[Hu Yaobang resists authoritarianism], in人民心中的胡耀邦 [Hu Yaobang in the people's hearts], ed. Su Shaozhi, Chen Yizi, and Gao Wenqian (Hong Kong, Mingjing chubanshe, 2006), 126-28.

67 Yang Jisheng, 中国改革年代的政治斗争, 256-75; Lin Mu, “胡耀邦抵制专制主义,” 128-31.

67 Yang Jisheng, 中国改革年代的政治斗争, 256-75; Lin Mu, “胡耀邦抵制专制主义,” 128-31.

68 Leng and Wang, 邓小平年谱, 939-40.

68 Leng and Wang, 邓小平年谱, 939-40.

69 Zhao Ziyang, 改革历程, 164; Thomas Gold, “‘Just in Time!’: China Battles Spiritual Pollution on the Eve of 1984,” Asian Survey 24, no. 9 (1984): 947-74.

69 赵紫阳，《铁路》，164；托马斯·戈尔德，“‘及时！’：中国在 1984 年前夕与精神污染作斗争”，《亚洲调查》24，第 9 期（1984 年）：947–74。

70 Zhao Ziyang, 改革历程, 164; Li Rui, “胡耀邦去世前的谈话”[A conversation with Hu Yaobang before his death], in人民心中的胡耀邦, 35.

70 Zhao Ziyang, 改革历程, 164; Li Rui, “胡耀邦去世前的谈话”[A conversation with Hu Yaobang before his death], in人民心中的胡耀邦, 35.

71 Ligang Song, "State-owned Enterprise Reform in China: Past, Present and Prospects," in China's 40 Years of Reform and Development 1978-2018, ed. Ross Garnaut, Ligang Song, and Cai Fang (Canberra: ANU Press, 2018), 345-69.

71 宋立刚，《中国国有企业改革：过去、现在和展望》，载于《中国改革与发展的40年（1978-2018）》，罗斯·加诺特、宋立刚、蔡芳编（堪培拉：澳大利亚国立大学出版社，2018 年），第 345-369 页。

72 You Ji, “Zhao Ziyang and the Politics of Inflation,” Australian Journal of Chinese Affairs, no. 25 (1991): 69–91.

72 尤吉，《赵紫阳与通货膨胀政治》，澳大利亚中国事务杂志，第25期（1991年）：69-91。

73 “雷宇：从副省级高官到普通百姓”[Lei Yu: From a deputy provincial official to an ordinary citizen], 南方周末 [Southern weekend], February 2, 2008. https://www.infzm.com/contents/9736.

73 “雷宇：从副省级高官到普通百姓”[Lei Yu: From a deputy provincial official to an ordinary citizen], 南方周末 [Southern weekend], February 2, 2008. https://www.infzm.com/contents/9736.

74 Richard Baum, "The Road to Tiananmen," in The Politics of China: Sixty Years of the People's Republic of China, ed. Roderick MacFarquhar, 3rd ed. (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2011), 396-98.

74 理查德·鲍姆，《通往天安门之路》，载《中国政治：中华人民共和国六十年》，罗德里克·麦克法夸尔编，第3版（纽约：剑桥大学出版社，2011年），第396-98页。

75 Yang Jisheng, 中国改革年代的政治斗争, 149-50, 166.

75 Yang Jisheng, 中国改革年代的政治斗争, 149-50, 166.

76 Zhu Houze, “胡耀邦的全面改革主张” [Hu Yaobang's comprehensive reform initiatives], 炎黄春秋 [China through the ages], no. 9 (2010): 1-5; Suettinger, The Conscience of the Party, 272-316.

76 Zhu Houze, “胡耀邦的全面改革主张” [Hu Yaobang's comprehensive reform initiatives], 炎黄春秋 [China through the ages], no. 9 (2010): 1-5; Suettinger, The Conscience of the Party, 272-316.

77 Chen Weiren, “胡耀邦与西藏” [Hu Yaobang and Tibet], in人民心中的胡耀邦, 166-84.

77 Chen Weiren, “胡耀邦与西藏” [Hu Yaobang and Tibet], in人民心中的胡耀邦, 166-84.

78 Su, Chen, and Gao, 人民心中的胡耀邦, 26.

78 Su, Chen, and Gao, 人民心中的胡耀邦, 26.

79 Zhao Ziyang, 改革历程, 161-62.

79 Zhao Ziyang, 改革历程, 161-62.

80 Zhao Ziyang, 162.

80 Zhao Ziyang, 162.

81 Zhao Ziyang, 163-64.

81 Zhao Ziyang, 163-64.

82 Zhao Ziyang, 163-74; Baum, Burying Mao, 391-94.

82 Zhao Ziyang, 163-74; Baum, Burying Mao, 391-94.

83 Zhao Ziyang, 改革历程, 163.

83 Zhao Ziyang, 改革历程, 163.

84 Yang Jisheng, 中国改革年代的政治斗争, 356-58; Richard Baum, “Deng Liquan and the Struggle Against ‘Bourgeois Liberalization’, 1979-1993,” China Information 9, no. 4 (1995): 1-35.

84 Yang Jisheng, 中国改革年代的政治斗争, 356-58; Richard Baum, “Deng Liquan and the Struggle Against ‘Bourgeois Liberalization’, 1979-1993,” China Information 9, no. 4 (1995): 1-35.

85 Wu Wei, “邓小平与‘5·13讲话”[Deng Xiaoping and the “5·13 Speech)], 炎黄春秋 [China through the ages], no. 3 (2015): 4-9.

85 Wu Wei, “邓小平与‘5·13讲话”[Deng Xiaoping and the “5·13 Speech)], 炎黄春秋 [China through the ages], no. 3 (2015): 4-9.

86 Zhao Ziyang, 改革历程, 189; Yang Jisheng, 中国改革年代的政治斗争, 360-61.

86 Zhao Ziyang, 改革历程, 189; Yang Jisheng, 中国改革年代的政治斗争, 360-61.

87 Zhao Ziyang, 改革历程, 120. According to Zhao, Chen was not in poor health and had no reason except to show his displeasure for leaving the stage.

87 赵子阳，《改革历程》，120。据赵子阳所述，陈的身体并不差，他离开舞台只是为了表达不满，并无其他理由。

88 Zhao Ziyang, 220-21.

88 Zhao Ziyang, 220-21.

89 Zhao Ziyang, 230-33.

89 Zhao Ziyang, 230-33.

90 Zhao Ziyang, 24-25, 38-39, 52-54.

90 Zhao Ziyang, 24-25, 38-39, 52-54.

91 Yang Su, Deadly Decision in Beijing (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2023).

91 杨苏，《北京的致命决定》（纽约：剑桥大学出版社，2023 年）。

92 Zhao Ziyang, 改革历程, 241.

92 Zhao Ziyang, 改革历程, 241.

93 Samuel Huntington, The Third Wave: Democratization in the Late Twentieth Century (Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1993), 124-41.

93 塞缪尔·亨廷顿，《第三波：二十世纪后期的民主化》（诺曼：俄克拉荷马大学出版社，1993 年），第 124-141 页。

94 Zhao Yuezhi, Media, Market, and Democracy in China: Between the Party Line and the Bottom Line (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1998).

94 赵跃之，《中国的媒体、市场与民主：党的路线与底线之间》（厄巴纳：伊利诺伊大学出版社，1998 年）。





Chapter 2. Reform and Growth in the 1980s





第二章 20世纪80年代的改革与增长


1 Lorean Brandt and Thomas G. Rawski, eds., China's Great Economic Transformation (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2008).

1 Lorean Brandt 和 Thomas G. Rawski 编，《中国的伟大经济转型》（纽约：剑桥大学出版社，2008 年）。

2 Wu Jinglian, “中国经济改革三十年历程的制度思考” [Institutional reflections on the thirty years of China's economic reforms], in 中国经济 50 人看三十年：回顾与分析 [Fifty perspectives on China's economy over thirty years: Review and analysis], ed. Wu Jinglian et al. (Beijing: Zhonghua jingji chubanshe, 2008), 4.

2 Wu Jinglian, “中国经济改革三十年历程的制度思考” [Institutional reflections on the thirty years of China's economic reforms], in 中国经济 50 人看三十年：回顾与分析 [Fifty perspectives on China's economy over thirty years: Review and analysis], ed. Wu Jinglian et al. (Beijing: Zhonghua jingji chubanshe, 2008), 4.

3 Deng Xiaoping, "Some Comments on Economic Work," October 4, 1979, https://www .marxists.org/reference/archive/deng-xiaoping/1979/82.htm.

3 邓小平，《关于经济工作的几点评论》，1979年10月4日，https://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/deng-xiaoping/1979/82.htm。

4 Deng Xiaoping, "We Can Develop a Market Economy Under Socialism," November 26, 1979, https://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/deng-xiaoping/1979/152.htm.

4 邓小平，《我们可以在社会主义制度下发展市场经济》，1979年11月26日，https://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/deng-xiaoping/1979/152.htm。

5 Justin Yifu Lin and Zhiqiang Liu, "Fiscal Decentralization and Economic Growth in China," Economic Development and Cultural Change 49, no. 1 (2000): 1-21; Christine Wong, "Central-Local Relations in an Era of Fiscal Decline: The Paradox of Fiscal Decentralization in Post-Mao China," China Quarterly, no. 128 (1991): 691-715.

5 Justin Yifu Lin 和 Zhiqiang Liu，“中国的财政分权与经济增长”，经济发展与文化变迁 49，第 1 期（2000 年）：1-21；Christine Wong，“财政衰退时代的中央与地方关系：后毛泽东时代中国财政分权的悖论”，中国季刊，第 128 期（1991 年）：691-715。

6 Sebastian Heilmann, "From Local Experiments to National Policy: The Origins of China's Distinctive Policy Process," China Journal, no. 59 (2008): 1-30.

6 Sebastian Heilmann，“从地方实验到国家政策：中国独特政策过程的起源”，《中国期刊》，第 59 期（2008 年）：1-30。

7 Lawrence Lau et al., "Reform Without Losers: An Interpretation of China's Dual-Track Approach to Transition," Journal of Political Economy 108, no. 1 (2000): 120-43.

7 Lawrence Lau 等人，“改革不输家：对中国双轨转型方法的解读”，《政治经济学杂志》108，第 1 期（2000 年）：120-43。

8 Wu Xiang, 中国农村改革实录 [Record of China's rural reform] (Hangzhou: Zhejiang renmin chubanshe, 2001); Daniel Kelliher, Peasant Power in China: The Era of Rural Reform, 1979-1989 (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1992); David Zweig, Freeing China's Farmers: Rural Restructuring in the Reform Era (Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe, 1997).

8 吴翔，《中国农村改革史》（杭州：浙江人民出版社，2001 年）；丹尼尔·凯利赫，《中国的农民力量：农村改革时代，1979-1989 年》（康涅狄格州纽黑文：耶鲁大学出版社，1992 年）；大卫·茨威格，《解放中国农民：改革时代的农村结构调整》（纽约州阿蒙克：M. E. Sharpe 出版社，1997 年）。

9 Wu Jinglian,“中国经济改革三十年历程的制度思考”4.

9 Wu Jinglian,“中国经济改革三十年历程的制度思考”4.

10 Lin Chonggeng “中国改革开放过程中的对外思想开放”[China's opening of the mind to the outside world in the process of reform and opening], in 中国经济50人看三十年, ed. Wu Jinglian, 20-40.

10 Lin Chonggeng “中国改革开放过程中的对外思想开放”[China's opening of the mind to the outside world in the process of reform and opening], in 中国经济50人看三十年, ed. Wu Jinglian, 20-40.

11 Wu Jinglian, “中国经济改革三十年历程的制度思考,” 9-11; Lin Chonggeng, “中国改革开放过程中的对外思想开放,” 20-40; for an excellent account of the influence of Western and Eastern European economists on China's reform, see Julian Gewirtz, Unlikely Partners: Chinese Reformers, Western Economists, and the Making of Global China (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2017).

11 Wu Jinglian, “中国经济改革三十年历程的制度思考,” 9-11; Lin Chonggeng, “中国改革开放过程中的对外思想开放,” 20-40; for an excellent account of the influence of Western and Eastern European economists on China's reform, see Julian Gewirtz, Unlikely Partners: Chinese Reformers, Western Economists, and the Making of Global China (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2017).

12 中国统计年鉴 1995 [China statistical yearbook 1995] (hereafter cited as ZGTJNJ 1995) (Beijing: Zhongguo tongji chubanshe, 1996), 26, 59.

12 中国统计年鉴 1995 [China statistical yearbook 1995] (hereafter cited as ZGTJNJ 1995) (Beijing: Zhongguo tongji chubanshe, 1996), 26, 59.

13 Shukai Zhao, The Politics of Peasants (Singapore: Springer, 2017); David Shambaugh, The Making of a Premier: Zhao Ziyang's Provincial Career (Boulder, CO: Westview, 1984); Kate Xiao Zhou, How the Farmers Changed China: Power of the People (Boulder, CO: Westview, 1996); Zhao Ziyang, 改革历程 [The course of reform] (Hong Kong: New Century, 2009), 136.

13 赵树凯，《农民政治》（新加坡：施普林格出版社，2017 年）；大卫·尚博，《总理的诞生：赵紫阳的省级生涯》（科罗拉多州博尔德：西景出版社，1984 年）；周晓，《农民如何改变中国：人民的力量》（科罗拉多州博尔德：西景出版社，1996 年）；赵紫阳，《改革历程》（香港：新世纪出版社，2009 年），第 136 页。

14 Deng Xiaoping, "On Questions of Rural Policy," May 31, 1980, in Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping (1975-1982) (Beijing: Foreign Languages Press, 1984), 297-99.

14 邓小平，《论农村政策问题》，1980 年 5 月 31 日，载《邓小平选集（1975-1982）》（北京：外文出版社，1984 年），第 297-299 页。

15 Zhao Ziyang, 改革历程, 137-38.

15 Zhao Ziyang, 改革历程, 137-38.

16 Yang Jisheng, 中国改革年代的政治斗争 [Political struggles in China's reform era] (Hong Kong: Excellent Culture Press, 2004), 231.

16 Yang Jisheng, 中国改革年代的政治斗争 [Political struggles in China's reform era] (Hong Kong: Excellent Culture Press, 2004), 231.

17 Yasheng Huang, "How Did China Take Off?", Journal of Economic Perspectives 26, no. 4 (2012): 147-70.

17 黄亚生，“中国是如何起飞的？”，《经济展望杂志》26，第4期（2012年）：147-70。

18 ZGTJNJ 1995,32.

18 ZGTJNJ 1995,32。

19 Justin Yifu Lin, "Rural Reforms and Agricultural Growth in China," American Economic Review 82, no. 1 (1992): 34-51; Guanzhong James Wen, "Total Factor Productivity Change in China's Farming Sector: 1952-1989," Economic Development and Cultural Change 42, no. 1 (1993): 1-41.

19 Justin Yifu Lin，“中国农村改革与农业增长”，《美国经济评论》82，第1期（1992年）：34-51；Guanzhong James Wen，“中国农业部门全要素生产率变化：1952-1989”，《经济发展与文化变迁》42，第1期（1993年）：1-41。

20 ZGTJNJ 1995,233,279.

20 ZGTJNJ 1995,233,279。

21 Deng Xiaoping, "Our Magnificent Goal and Basic Policies," October 6, 1984, in Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping, vol. 3 (1982-1992) (Beijing: Foreign Languages Press, 1994), 85-87.

21 邓小平，《我们的伟大目标和基本政策》，1984年10月6日，载《邓小平选集》第3卷（1982-1992）（北京：外文出版社，1994年），第85-87页。

22 Hongyi Chen, The Institutional Transition of China's Township and Village Enterprises: Market Liberalization, Contractual Form Innovation, and Privatization (London: Routledge, 2018); Louis Putterman, "On the Past and Future of China's Township and Village-Owned Enterprises," World Development 25, no. 10 (1997): 1639-55.

22 洪义陈，《中国乡镇和乡村企业的制度转型：市场自由化、合同形式创新和私有化》（伦敦：Routledge，2018 年）；路易斯·普特曼，“论中国乡镇和乡村所有制企业的过去和未来”，《世界发展》25，第 10 期（1997 年）：1639-55。

23 Jean Oi, "Fiscal Reform and the Economic Foundations of Local State Corporatism in China," World Politics 45, no. 1 (1992): 99-126.

23 Jean Oi，“财政改革与中国地方国家社团主义的经济基础”，《世界政治》45，第1期（1992年）：99-126。

24 Enrico Perotti et al., "State-Owned Versus Township and Village Enterprises in China," Comparative Economic Studies 41, no. 2 (1999): 151-79; Jeffrey Nugent et al., "Competition, Incentives, and Productivity in Chinese Township and Village Enterprises," Pacific Economic Review 4, no. 2 (1999): 91-113; David Zweig, "Internationalizing China's Countryside: The Political Economy of Exports from Rural Industry," China Quarterly, no. 128 (1991): 716-41.

24 Enrico Perotti 等人，“中国国有企业与乡镇和乡村企业”，《比较经济研究》41，第 2 期（1999 年）：151-79；Jeffrey Nugent 等人，“中国乡镇和乡村企业的竞争、激励和生产力”，《太平洋经济评论》4，第 2 期（1999 年）：91-113；David Zweig，“中国农村国际化：农村工业出口的政治经济学”，《中国季刊》128 期（1991 年）：716-41。

25 Yasheng Huang, Capitalism with Chinese Characteristics: Entrepreneurship and the State (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2008); Kellee Tsai, Back-Alley Banking: Private Entrepreneurs in China (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2004).

25 黄亚生，《中国特色资本主义：企业家精神与国家》（纽约：剑桥大学出版社，2008 年）；蔡凯莉，《后巷银行：中国的私人企业家》（纽约州伊萨卡：康奈尔大学出版社，2004 年）。

26 Chen, Institutional Transition.

26 陈，制度转型。

27 Deng Xiaoping, "We Shall Speed Up Reform," June 12, 1987, in Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping, 3:236.

27 邓小平，《我们将加快改革》，1987年6月12日，载《邓小平选集》第3卷第236页。

28 Huang, "How Did China Take Off?," 155-57.

28 黄，《中国是如何起飞的？》，155-57。

29 Zhang Houyi and Ming Lizhi, 中国私营企业发展报告1978-1998 [Report on the development of private enterprises in China 1978-1998] (Beijing: Shehui kexue wenxian chubanshe, 1999); Victor Nee and Frank W. Young, "Peasant Entrepreneurs in China's Second Economy: An Institutional Analysis," Economic Development and Cultural Change 39, no. 2 (1991): 293-310.

29 Zhang Houyi and Ming Lizhi, 中国私营企业发展报告1978-1998 [Report on the development of private enterprises in China 1978-1998] (Beijing: Shehui kexue wenxian chubanshe, 1999); Victor Nee and Frank W. Young, "Peasant Entrepreneurs in China's Second Economy: An Institutional Analysis," Economic Development and Cultural Change 39, no. 2 (1991): 293-310.

30 Zhang Houyi, “私营企业主阶层在我国社会结构中的地位” [The position of private business owners in the social structure of our country], 中国社会科学 [China social sciences], no. 6 (1994): 101.

30 Zhang Houyi, “私营企业主阶层在我国社会结构中的地位” [The position of private business owners in the social structure of our country], 中国社会科学 [China social sciences], no. 6 (1994): 101.

31 ZGTJNJ 1990 (Beijing: Zhongguo tongji chubanshe, 1991), 33, 641.

31 ZGTJNJ 1990 (Beijing: Zhongguo tongji chubanshe, 1991), 33, 641.

32 Nora Wang, “Deng Xiaoping: The Years in France,” China Quarterly, no. 92 (1982): 698-705.

32 Nora Wang，“邓小平：在法国的岁月”，《中国季刊》，第92期（1982年）：698-705。

33 Leng Rong and Wang Zuoling, eds., 邓小平年谱上册 (1975-1997) [Deng Xiaoping chronology (1975-1997)] (Beijing: Zhongyang wenxian chubanshe, 2004), 512.

33 Leng Rong and Wang Zuoling, eds., 邓小平年谱上册 (1975-1997) [Deng Xiaoping chronology (1975-1997)] (Beijing: Zhongyang wenxian chubanshe, 2004), 512.

34 Leng and Wang, 254-87.

34 Leng 和 Wang，254-87。

35 Deng Xiaoping, "Some Comments on Economic Work," October 4, 1979, https://www .marxists.org/reference/archive/deng-xiaoping/1979/82.htm.

35 邓小平，《关于经济工作的几点评论》，1979年10月4日，https://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/deng-xiaoping/1979/82.htm。

36 Deng Xiaoping, "We Can Develop a Market Economy Under Socialism," November 26, 1979, https://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/deng-xiaoping/1979/152.htm.

36 邓小平，《我们可以在社会主义制度下发展市场经济》，1979年11月26日，https://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/deng-xiaoping/1979/152.htm。

37 Deng Xiaoping, "Our Magnificent Goal and Basic Policies," October 6, 1984, in Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping, 3:86.

37 邓小平，《我们的伟大目标和基本政策》，1984 年 10 月 6 日，载《邓小平选集》第 3 卷，第 86 页。

38 China passed an interim enterprise bankruptcy law in 1986. A semifunctioning capital market did not emerge until the 1990s with the establishment of stock exchanges and the reorganization of the banking system.

38 中国于 1986 年通过了《企业破产法》暂行法。直到 20 世纪 90 年代，随着证券交易所的建立和银行体系的重组，才出现了一个半运转的资本市场。

39 Leng and Wang, 邓小平年谱上册, 519-20.

39 Leng and Wang, 邓小平年谱上册, 519-20.

40 Leng and Wang, 525.

40 Leng 和 Wang，525。

41 全国人民代表大会 [National People's Congress], “中华人民共和国中外合资经营企业法” [Law of the People's Republic of China on Chinese-foreign equity joint ventures], July 8, 1979, https://law.pkulaw.com/falv/44feS19756440da6bddfb.html.

41 全国人民代表大会 [National People's Congress], “中华人民共和国中外合资经营企业法” [Law of the People's Republic of China on Chinese-foreign equity joint ventures], July 8, 1979, https://law.pkulaw.com/falv/44feS19756440da6bddfb.html.

42 Leng and Wang, 邓小平年谱上册, 529; Margaret Pearson, Joint Ventures in the People's Republic of China (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1992).

42 Leng and Wang, 邓小平年谱上册, 529; Margaret Pearson, Joint Ventures in the People's Republic of China (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1992).

43 “中华人民共和国外资企业法”[Law of the People's Republic of China on foreign-funded enterprises], http://tfs.mofcom.gov.cn/article/ba/bl/201101/20110107349307.shtml.

43 “中华人民共和国外资企业法”[Law of the People's Republic of China on foreign-funded enterprises], http://tfs.mofcom.gov.cn/article/ba/bl/201101/20110107349307.shtml.

44 中华人民共和国商务部 [Ministry of Commerce of the People's Republic of China], “中华人民共和国外资企业法实施细则”[Implementation regulations of the People's Republic of China on foreign-funded enterprises], December 12, 1990, http://wzs.mofcom.gov.cn/article/n/200208/20020800037017.shtml.

44 中华人民共和国商务部 [Ministry of Commerce of the People's Republic of China], “中华人民共和国外资企业法实施细则”[Implementation regulations of the People's Republic of China on foreign-funded enterprises], December 12, 1990, http://wzs.mofcom.gov.cn/article/n/200208/20020800037017.shtml.

45 The provisions of this law resemble the joint-venture law issued in 1979, but the contributions of joint-venture partners could include noncash items. “中华人民共和国中外合作经营企业法” [Law of the People's Republic of China on Sino-foreign contractual joint ventures], http://www.npc.gov.cn/zgrdw/npc/xinwen/2017-11/28/content_2032723.htm.

45 The provisions of this law resemble the joint-venture law issued in 1979, but the contributions of joint-venture partners could include noncash items. “中华人民共和国中外合作经营企业法” [Law of the People's Republic of China on Sino-foreign contractual joint ventures], http://www.npc.gov.cn/zgrdw/npc/xinwen/2017-11/28/content_2032723.htm.

46 Hooshang Amirahmadi and Weiping Wu, "Export Processing Zones in Asia," Asian Survey 35, no. 9 (1995): 828-49.

46 Hooshang Amirahmadi 和 Weiping Wu，“亚洲的出口加工区”，亚洲调查 35，第 9 期（1995 年）：828-49。

47 Leng and Wang, 邓小平年谱上册, 510.

47 Leng and Wang, 邓小平年谱上册, 510.

48 Clyde Stoltenberg, "China's Special Economic Zones: Their Development and Prospects," Asian Survey 24, no. 6 (1984): 642-43; "The国务院关于厦门经济特区实施方案的批复" [State Council approval of the implementation plan for Xiamen Special Economic Zone], June 29, 1985, http://www.gov.cn/xxgk/pub/govpublic/mrlm/201309/t20130929_66434.html.

48 Clyde Stoltenberg, "China's Special Economic Zones: Their Development and Prospects," Asian Survey 24, no. 6 (1984): 642-43; "The国务院关于厦门经济特区实施方案的批复" [State Council approval of the implementation plan for Xiamen Special Economic Zone], June 29, 1985, http://www.gov.cn/xxgk/pub/govpublic/mrlm/201309/t20130929_66434.html.

49 George Crane, The Political Economy of China's Economic Zones (Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe, 1989); Wei Ge, "Special Economic Zones and the Opening of the Chinese Economy: Some Lessons for Economic Liberalization," World Development 27, no. 7 (1999): 1267-85.

49 George Crane，《中国经济特区的政治经济学》（纽约州阿蒙克：M. E. Sharpe，1989 年）；魏戈，“经济特区与中国经济开放：对经济自由化的一些启示”，《世界发展》27，第 7 期（1999 年）：1267-85。

50 第五届全国人民代表大会常务委员会 [Standing Committee of the Fifth National People's Congress], “广东省经济特区条例” [Regulations on the special economic zones in Guangdong province], August 26, 1980, http://www.zhxz.gov.cn/xxgk/fggw/dfxfg/content/post_1448488.html.

50 第五届全国人民代表大会常务委员会 [Standing Committee of the Fifth National People's Congress], “广东省经济特区条例” [Regulations on the special economic zones in Guangdong province], August 26, 1980, http://www.zhxz.gov.cn/xxgk/fggw/dfxfg/content/post_1448488.html.

51 Guo Shiping and Chen Hongbo, “深圳特区与其他特区经济发展状况的比较研究”[Comparative study of the economic development in Shenzhen Special Economic Zone and other special economic zones], 特区经济 [Special economic zone economy], no. 2 (1995): 47-49; ZGTJNJ 1990, 653.

51 Guo Shiping and Chen Hongbo, “深圳特区与其他特区经济发展状况的比较研究”[Comparative study of the economic development in Shenzhen Special Economic Zone and other special economic zones], 特区经济 [Special economic zone economy], no. 2 (1995): 47-49; ZGTJNJ 1990, 653.

52 Guo and Chen, “深圳特区与其他特区经济发展状况的比较研究,” 49; ZGTJNJ1990, 641.

52 Guo and Chen, “深圳特区与其他特区经济发展状况的比较研究,” 49; ZGTJNJ1990, 641.

53 Yue-man Yeung et al., "China's Special Economic Zones at 30," Eurasian Geography and Economics 50, no. 2 (2009): 222-40.

53 杨岳文等，“中国经济特区成立30周年”，欧亚地理与经济 50，第2期（2009年）：222-40。

54 Guo and Chen, “深圳特区与其他特区经济发展状况的比较研究,” 47.

54 Guo and Chen, “深圳特区与其他特区经济发展状况的比较研究,” 47.

55 Zhao Ziyang, 改革历程, 141-49; Fuh-Wen Tzeng, “The Political Economy of China's Coastal Development Strategy: A Preliminary Analysis,” Asian Survey 31, no. 3 (1991): 270-84.

55 赵紫阳，《公告》，141-149页；曾福文，《中国沿海开发战略的政治经济学：初步分析》，《亚洲研究》31卷3期（1991年）：270-278页

56 Nicholas Lardy, Foreign Trade and Economic Reform in China (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1991), 1-15; Peter Harrold, "China: Foreign Trade Reform: Now for the Hard Part," Oxford Review of Economic Policy 11, no. 4 (1995): 134; Changjun Yue and Ping Hua, "Does Comparative Advantage Explain Export Patterns in China?" China Economic Review 13, no. 2-3 (2002): 276-96.

56 Nicholas Lardy，《中国的对外贸易与经济改革》（纽约：剑桥大学出版社，1991 年），第 1-15 页；Peter Harrold，“中国：对外贸易改革：现在是艰难的阶段”，《牛津经济政策评论》11，第 4 期（1995 年）：134；岳长军和华平，“比较优势能解释中国的出口模式吗？”，《中国经济评论》13，第 2-3 期（2002 年）：276-96。

57 ZGTJNJ 1990,33,641.

57 ZGTJNJ 1990,33,641。

58 Harrold, "China: Foreign Trade Reform," 135.

58 哈罗德，《中国：对外贸易改革》，135。

59 Weijian Shan, "Reforms of China's Foreign Trade System: Experiences and Prospects," China Economic Review 1, no. 1 (1989): 35-38; Nicholas R. Lardy, Integrating China into the Global Economy (Washington DC: Brookings, 2002), 29.

59 魏建，《中国对外贸易体制改革：经验与展望》，《中国经济评论》1，第1期（1989年）：35-38；Nicholas R. Lardy，《将中国融入全球经济》（华盛顿特区：布鲁金斯学会，2002年），29。

60 Shan, "Reforms of China's Foreign Trade System," 38-39; Nai-Ruenn Chen and Jeffrey Lee, China's Economy, and Foreign Trade 1981-85 (Washington, DC: US Department of Commerce, 1984).

60 Shan，“中国对外贸易制度改革”，38-39；陈乃仁和李杰弗里，《中国经济与对外贸易 1981-85》（华盛顿特区：美国商务部，1984 年）。

61 Shan, "Reforms of China's Foreign Trade System," 39-44; Lardy, Foreign Trade and Economic Reform, 41; Yang Sujin, "论中国外贸体制的改革," Modern China Studies, no. 2 (1997), https://www.modernchinastudies.org/us/issues/past-issues/57-mcs-1997-issue-2/401-2011-12-29-17-45-11.html.

61 Shan, "Reforms of China's Foreign Trade System," 39-44; Lardy, Foreign Trade and Economic Reform, 41; Yang Sujin, "论中国外贸体制的改革," Modern China Studies, no. 2 (1997), https://www.modernchinastudies.org/us/issues/past-issues/57-mcs-1997-issue-2/401-2011-12-29-17-45-11.html.

62 Shan, "Reforms of China's Foreign Trade System," 43-45; Harrold, "China: Foreign Trade Reform," 136-38; Lardy, Foreign Trade and Economic Reform, 46-69.

62 Shan，《中国对外贸易体制改革》，43-45；Harrold，《中国：对外贸易改革》，136-38；Lardy，《对外贸易与经济改革》，46-69。

63 Shuanglin Lin, "Foreign Trade and China's Economic Development: A Time-Series Analysis," Journal of Economic Development 25, no. 1 (2000): 148.

63 林双林，“对外贸易与中国经济发展：时间序列分析”，经济发展杂志 25，第 1 期（2000 年）：148。

64 ZGTJNJ 1990, 33, 641.

64 ZGTJNJ 1990, 33, 641。

65 Lin Yifu and Li Yongjun, “对外贸易与经济增长关系的再考察” [Reexamination of the relationship between foreign trade and economic growth], 国际贸易 [International trade], no. 9 (2001): 23-27.

65 Lin Yifu and Li Yongjun, “对外贸易与经济增长关系的再考察” [Reexamination of the relationship between foreign trade and economic growth], 国际贸易 [International trade], no. 9 (2001): 23-27.

66 Douglas Zhihua Zeng, How Do Special Economic Zones and Industrial Clusters Drive China's Rapid Development? (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2011); Françoise Lemoine and Deniz Ünal-Kesenci, "Assembly Trade and Technology Transfer: The Case of China," World Development 32, no. 5 (2004): 829-50; Qiao Yu, "Capital Investment, International Trade and Economic Growth in China: Evidence in the 1980-1990s," China Economic Review 9, no. 1 (1998): 73-84.

66 曾志华，《经济特区和产业集群如何推动中国的快速发展？》（华盛顿特区：世界银行，2011 年）；弗朗索瓦丝·勒莫因和德尼兹·于纳尔-凯森奇，“组装贸易和技术转让：以中国为例”，《世界发展》32，第 5 期（2004 年）：829-50；乔宇，“中国资本投资、国际贸易和经济增长：1980-1990 年代的证据”，《中国经济评论》9，第 1 期（1998 年）：73-84。

67 Harrold, "China: Foreign Trade Reform," 138-39.

67 哈罗德，《中国：对外贸易改革》，138-39。

68 Andrew Walder, "China's Private Sector," in China's Domestic Private Firms, ed. Anne Tsui et al. (London: Routledge, 2006), 311-26.

68 Andrew Walder，“中国的私营部门”，载于 Anne Tsui 等人编，《中国的国内私营企业》（伦敦：Routledge，2006 年），第 311-26 页。

69 Barry Naughton, Growing Out of the Plan: Chinese Economic Reform, 1978-1993 (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1995).

69 巴里·诺顿，《走出计划：中国经济改革，1978-1993》（纽约：剑桥大学出版社，1995 年）。

70 Zhao Ziyang, 改革历程, 122-24.

70 Zhao Ziyang, 改革历程, 122-24.

71 Nicholas Lardy, "Private Sector Development," in China's 40 Years of Reform and Development, 1978-2018, ed. Ross Garnaut et al. (Canberra: ANU Press, 2018), 330.

71 Nicholas Lardy，“私营部门发展”，载于 Ross Garnaut 等人编，《中国改革与发展的 40 年，1978-2018》（堪培拉：澳大利亚国立大学出版社，2018 年），第 330 页。

72 ZGTJNJ 1990,414.

72 ZGTJNJ 1990,414。

73 Wu Jinglian, 当代中国经济改革 [Economic reforms in contemporary China] (Shanghai: Yuanjing chubanshe, 2003), 66-68; Lau et al., “Reform Without Losers,” 120-43.

73 Wu Jinglian, 当代中国经济改革 [Economic reforms in contemporary China] (Shanghai: Yuanjing chubanshe, 2003), 66-68; Lau et al., “Reform Without Losers,” 120-43.

74 Wu Jinglian, 当代中国经济改革, 66-68.

74 Wu Jinglian, 当代中国经济改革, 66-68.

75 Zhao Ziyang, 改革历程, 122-24.

75 Zhao Ziyang, 改革历程, 122-24.

76 国务院 [State Council], “关于城镇非农业个体经济若干政策性规定” [Several policy provisions on nonagricultural individually operated economic activities in urban areas], July 7, 1981, http://www.reformdata.org/1981/0707/6330.shtml.

76 国务院 [State Council], “关于城镇非农业个体经济若干政策性规定” [Several policy provisions on nonagricultural individually operated economic activities in urban areas], July 7, 1981, http://www.reformdata.org/1981/0707/6330.shtml.

77 “中华人民共和国宪法” [Constitution of the People's Republic of China], https://www.elegislation.gov.hk/hk/A1%21en-sc assists.pdf.

77 “中华人民共和国宪法” [Constitution of the People's Republic of China], https://www.elegislation.gov.hk/hk/A1%21en-sc assists.pdf.

78 “当前农村经济政策的若干问题”[Several issues regarding current rural economic policies], January 2, 1983, https://finance.sina.cn/sa/2010-02-01/detail-ikftssan9543782.d.html; 国务院关于农民个人或联户购置机动车船和拖拉机经营运输业的若干规定 [State Council regulations on farmers' individual or joint purchases of motor vehicles, boats, and tractors to operate in transportation businesses], February 27, 1984, https://www.flfgk.com/detail/8e66166d9c7e0a57577c1fd2fS1a02f1.html.

78 “当前农村经济政策的若干问题”[Several issues regarding current rural economic policies], January 2, 1983, https://finance.sina.cn/sa/2010-02-01/detail-ikftssan9543782.d.html; 国务院关于农民个人或联户购置机动车船和拖拉机经营运输业的若干规定 [State Council regulations on farmers' individual or joint purchases of motor vehicles, boats, and tractors to operate in transportation businesses], February 27, 1984, https://www.flfgk.com/detail/8e66166d9c7e0a57577c1fd2fS1a02f1.html.

79 Yang Jisheng, 中国改革年代的政治斗争, 240-43; Keith Forster, “The 1982 Campaign Against Economic Crime in China,” Australian Journal of Chinese Affairs, no. 14 (1985): 1-19.

79 Yang Jisheng, 中国改革年代的政治斗争, 240-43; Keith Forster, “The 1982 Campaign Against Economic Crime in China,” Australian Journal of Chinese Affairs, no. 14 (1985): 1-19.

80 “中国改革先锋项南‘晋江假药案’蒙冤下台”[Chinese reform pioneer Xiang Nan, falsely implicated in the “Jinjiang fake drug case,” steps down from office], September 4, 2008, http://phtv.ifeng.com/program/tfzg/200809/0904_2950_764236.shtml.

80 “中国改革先锋项南‘晋江假药案’蒙冤下台”[Chinese reform pioneer Xiang Nan, falsely implicated in the “Jinjiang fake drug case,” steps down from office], September 4, 2008, http://phtv.ifeng.com/program/tfzg/200809/0904_2950_764236.shtml.

81 Leng and Wang, 邓小平年谱下册, 1008.

81 Leng and Wang, 邓小平年谱下册, 1008.

82 The language of the amendment replaces geti jingji with siying jingji. No other provisions were changed. "中华人民共和国宪法修正案" [Amendments to the Constitution of the People's Republic of China], 1988, https://www.elegislation.gov.hk/hk/A2%21zh-Hant-HK assists.pdf.

82 修正案的语言将“综合经济”改为“四营经济”。其他条款没有改变。 《宪法修改案》[中华人民共和国宪法修正案]，1988 年，https://www.elegislation.gov.hk/hk/A2%21zh-Hant-HK Assists.pdf。

83 “中华人民共和国私营企业暂行条例”[Interim regulations of the People's Republic of China on private enterprises], https://www.gov.cn/gongbao/shuju/1988/gwyb198815.pdf.

83 “中华人民共和国私营企业暂行条例”[Interim regulations of the People's Republic of China on private enterprises], https://www.gov.cn/gongbao/shuju/1988/gwyb198815.pdf.

84 Zhang Houyi, “又一支异军突起”[Another new force emerges], in Zhang and Ming, 中国私营企业发展报告, 16, 42.

84 Zhang Houyi, “又一支异军突起”[Another new force emerges], in Zhang and Ming, 中国私营企业发展报告, 16, 42.

85 ZGTGNJ 1990, 400. In 1978 all TVEs were collectives, but most of the newly created TVEs were private.

85 ZGTGNJ 1990, 400。1978 年，所有 TVE 都是集体所有制，但大多数新成立的 TVE 都是私营的。

86 ZGTGNJ 1990, 20, 401. "Total social output," a Chinese accounting method used in the 1980s, was about 45 percent of GDP.

86 ZGTGNJ 1990, 20, 401. “社会总产出”是 20 世纪 80 年代中国使用的一种会计方法，约占 GDP 的 45%。

87 Yanjie Bian and Zhangxin Zhang, "Explaining China's Emerging Private Economy," in China's Domestic Private Firms, ed. Anne Tsui et al., 25-39; David Wank, "Bureaucratic Patronage and Private Business: Changing Networks of Power in Urban China," in The Waning of the Communist State: Economic Origins of Political Decline in China and Hungary, ed. Andrew G. Walder (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1995), 153-83.

87 卞彦杰和张章新，《解释中国新兴的私营经济》，载于徐安妮等编，《中国国内私营企业》，第25-39页；戴维·万克，《官僚庇护与私营企业：中国城市权力网络的变化》，载于安德鲁·G·沃尔德编，《共产主义国家的衰落：中国和匈牙利政治衰落的经济根源》（伯克利：加州大学出版社，1995年），第153-183页。

88 Zhang Houyi, “又一支异军突起,” 15.

88 Zhang Houyi, “又一支异军突起,” 15.

89 Anne Tsui et al., "Explaining the Growth and Development of the Chinese Domestic Private Sector," in China's Domestic Private Firms, ed. Tsui et al., 9; Zhang Houyi, "又一支异军突起," 51-53.

89 Anne Tsui et al., "Explaining the Growth and Development of the Chinese Domestic Private Sector," in China's Domestic Private Firms, ed. Tsui et al., 9; Zhang Houyi, "又一支异军突起," 51-53.

90 David Daokui Li, "A Survey of Economics Literature on China's Nonstate Enterprises," in China's Domestic Private Firms, ed. Tsui et al., 128-46.

90 David Daokui Li，“中国非国有企业经济学文献综述”，载于 Tsui 等人编，《中国国内私营企业》，第 128-46 页。

91 Zhang Houyi, “又一支异军突起” 51.

91 Zhang Houyi, “又一支异军突起” 51.

92 Huang, "How Did China Take Off?" 154.

92 黄，《中国是如何起飞的？》154。

93 Zhang Houyi, “私营企业主阶层在我国社会结构中的地位,” 101-2.

93 Zhang Houyi, “私营企业主阶层在我国社会结构中的地位,” 101-2.

94 ZGTJNJ 1990, 29, 115.

94 ZGTJNJ 1990, 29, 115。

95 David Granick, "The Industrial Environment in China and the CMEA Countries," in China's Industrial Reform, ed. Gene Tidrick and Chen Jiyuan (Washington, DC: World Bank, 1987), 103-31.

95 David Granick，“中国和经互会国家的工业环境”，载于《中国的工业改革》，Gene Tidrick 和陈继元编（华盛顿特区：世界银行，1987 年），第 103-131 页。

96 Wu Jinglian, 当代中国经济改革, 133-36; Janos Kornai, “The Soft Budget Constraint,” Kyklos 39, no. 1 (1986): 3-30.

96 Wu Jinglian, 当代中国经济改革, 133-36; Janos Kornai, “The Soft Budget Constraint,” Kyklos 39, no. 1 (1986): 3-30.

97 Xiaoyuan Dong and Louis Putterman, "Soft Budget Constraints, Social Burdens, and Labor Redundancy in China's State Industry," Journal of Comparative Economics 31, no. 1 (2003): 110-33; Justin Yifu Lin et al., "Competition, Policy Burdens, and State-Owned Enterprise Reform," American Economic Review 88, no. 2 (1998): 422-27.

97 Xiaoyuan Dong 和 Louis Putterman，“中国国有企业的软预算约束、社会负担和劳动力冗余”，《比较经济学杂志》31，第 1 期（2003 年）：110-33；Justin Yifu Lin 等人，“竞争、政策负担和国有企业改革”，《美国经济评论》88，第 2 期（1998 年）：422-27。

98 Bernard Chavance and Charles Hauss, The Transformation of Communist Systems: Economic Reform Since the 1950s (Boulder, CO: Westview, 1994).

98 Bernard Chavance 和 Charles Hauss，《共产主义制度的转型：20 世纪 50 年代以来的经济改革》（科罗拉多州博尔德：Westview，1994 年）。

99 Naughton, Growing Out of the Plan, 97-109; Ma Jiantang, “三十年巨变：国有企业改革进程简要回顾与评述” [Thirty years of profound changes: A brief review and commentary on the reform process of state-owned enterprises], in 中国经济50人看三十年, ed. Wu Jinglian, 349-58.

99 Naughton, Growing Out of the Plan, 97-109; Ma Jiantang, “三十年巨变：国有企业改革进程简要回顾与评述” [Thirty years of profound changes: A brief review and commentary on the reform process of state-owned enterprises], in 中国经济50人看三十年, ed. Wu Jinglian, 349-58.

100 “关于扩大国营工业企业经营管理自主权的若干规定” [Several provisions on expanding the operational autonomy and management of state-owned industrial enterprises], http://www.reformdata.org/1979/0713/5879.shtml.

100 “关于扩大国营工业企业经营管理自主权的若干规定” [Several provisions on expanding the operational autonomy and management of state-owned industrial enterprises], http://www.reformdata.org/1979/0713/5879.shtml.

101 Ma Jiantang, “三十年巨变：国有企业改革进程简要回顾与评述”, 350.

101 Ma Jiantang, “三十年巨变：国有企业改革进程简要回顾与评述”, 350.

102 Wu Jinglian, 当代中国经济改革, 142; Ligang Song, “State-Owned Enterprise Reform in China,” in Garnaut et al., China's 40 Years of Reform and Development, 347.

102 Wu Jinglian, 当代中国经济改革, 142; Ligang Song, “State-Owned Enterprise Reform in China,” in Garnaut et al., China's 40 Years of Reform and Development, 347.

103 Wu Jinglian and Liu Jirui, 论竞争性市场体制 [On the competitive market system] (Beijing: Zhongxin chubanshe, 2017), 118.

103 Wu Jinglian and Liu Jirui, 论竞争性市场体制 [On the competitive market system] (Beijing: Zhongxin chubanshe, 2017), 118.

104 Wu Jinglian, 当代中国经济改革, 156; Ma Jiantang, “三十年巨变,” 350-51.

104 Wu Jinglian, 当代中国经济改革, 156; Ma Jiantang, “三十年巨变,” 350-51.

105 “国务院体制改革办公室关于实行工业生产经济责任制若干问题的意见”[Opinions of the State Council Institutional Reform Office on several issues regarding implementation of the system of industrial production and economic responsibility], October 29, 1981, http://www.reformdata.org/1981/1029/5884.shtml.

105 “国务院体制改革办公室关于实行工业生产经济责任制若干问题的意见”[Opinions of the State Council Institutional Reform Office on several issues regarding implementation of the system of industrial production and economic responsibility], October 29, 1981, http://www.reformdata.org/1981/1029/5884.shtml.

106 “全民所有制工业企业承包经营责任制暂行条例”[Interim regulations on the contract management responsibility system for industrial enterprises owned by the whole people], https://www.gov.cn/gongbao/content/2011/content_1860724.htm.

106 “全民所有制工业企业承包经营责任制暂行条例”[Interim regulations on the contract management responsibility system for industrial enterprises owned by the whole people], https://www.gov.cn/gongbao/content/2011/content_1860724.htm.

107 Wu Jinglian, 当代中国经济改革, 140.

107 Wu Jinglian, 当代中国经济改革, 140.

108 Ma Jiantang, “三十年巨变,” 350-51.

108 Ma Jiantang, “三十年巨变,” 350-51.

109 Wu Jinglian, 当代中国经济改革, 139-40; Ma Jiantang, “三十年巨变”, 351-52.

109 Wu Jinglian, 当代中国经济改革, 139-40; Ma Jiantang, “三十年巨变”, 351-52.

110 Gary Jefferson and Thomas Rawski, "Enterprise Reform in Chinese Industry," Journal of Economic Perspectives 8, no. 2 (1994): 47-70; William Byrd, Chinese Industrial Firms Under Reform (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1992).

110 Gary Jefferson 和 Thomas Rawski，“中国工业的企业改革”，《经济展望杂志》8，第 2 期（1994 年）：47-70；William Byrd，《改革下的中国工业企业》（牛津：牛津大学出版社，1992 年）。

111 Wu Jinglian, 当代中国经济改革; Ma Jiantang, “三十年巨变”: Wing Thye Woo et al., “How Successful Has Chinese Enterprise Reform Been? Pitfalls in Opposite Biases and Focus,” Journal of Comparative Economics 18, no. 3 (1994): 410-37.

111 Wu Jinglian, 当代中国经济改革; Ma Jiantang, “三十年巨变”: Wing Thye Woo et al., “How Successful Has Chinese Enterprise Reform Been? Pitfalls in Opposite Biases and Focus,” Journal of Comparative Economics 18, no. 3 (1994): 410-37.

112 Weiye Li and Louis Putterman, "Reforming China's SOEs: An Overview," Comparative Economic Studies, no. 50 (2008): 353-80.

112 魏业李和路易斯·普特曼，“改革中国国有企业：概述”，比较经济研究，第 50 期（2008 年）：353-80。

113 Zhao Ziyang, 改革历程, 124.

113 Zhao Ziyang, 改革历程, 124.

114 Zhang Jun, "China's Price Liberalization and Market Reform: A Historical Perspective," in Garnaut et al., China's 40 Years of Reform and Development, 215-33.

114 张军，《中国的价格自由化和市场改革：历史视角》，载于 Garnaut 等编，《中国改革与发展的 40 年》，第 215-33 页。

115 Edward Lazear, Economic Transition in Eastern Europe and Russia: Realities of Reform (Stanford, CA: Hoover Press, 1995).

115 爱德华·拉泽尔，《东欧和俄罗斯的经济转型：改革的现实》（斯坦福，加利福尼亚州：胡佛出版社，1995 年）。

116 Zhang Weiying, “双轨制与价格改革” [The dual-track system and price reform], in 中国经济50人看三十年, ed. Wu Jinglian, 582-99.

116 Zhang Weiying, “双轨制与价格改革” [The dual-track system and price reform], in 中国经济50人看三十年, ed. Wu Jinglian, 582-99.

117 “国务院关于进一步扩大国营工业企业自主权的暂行规定”[Interim provisions of the State Council on further expanding the autonomy of state-owned industrial enterprises],广东省人民政府 [Guangdong People's Government], August 21, 1984, http://www.gd.gov.cn/zwgk/gongbao/1984/10/content/post_3354361.html.

117 “国务院关于进一步扩大国营工业企业自主权的暂行规定”[Interim provisions of the State Council on further expanding the autonomy of state-owned industrial enterprises],广东省人民政府 [Guangdong People's Government], August 21, 1984, http://www.gd.gov.cn/zwgk/gongbao/1984/10/content/post_3354361.html.

118 Lau et al., "Reform Without Losers," 120-43; Gang Fan, "Incremental Changes and Dual-Track Transition: Understanding the Case of China," Economic Policy 9, no. 19 (1994): 100-22.

118 Lau 等人，“改革不输家”，120-43；范刚，“渐进式变革与双轨转型：理解中国案例”，经济政策 9，第 19 期（1994 年）：100-22。

119 Jinglian Wu and Zhao Renwei, "The Dual Pricing System in China's Industry," Journal of Comparative Economics 11, no. 3 (1987): 309-18; Anthony Koo and Norman Obst, "Dual-Track and Mandatory Quota in China's Price Reform," Comparative Economic Studies, no. 37 (1995): 1-17.

119 吴景莲和赵仁伟，“中国工业的双重定价体系”，《比较经济学杂志》11，第3期（1987年）：309-18；Anthony Koo和Norman Obst，“中国价格改革中的双轨制和强制配额制”，《比较经济研究》37期（1995年）：1-17。

120 Leong Liew, "Rent-Seeking and the Two-Track Price System in China," Public Choice 77, no. 2 (1993): 359-75; Wu and Zhao, "The Dual Pricing System."

120 Leong Liew，“中国的寻租和双轨价格体系”，公共选择 77，第 2 期（1993 年）：359-75；吴和赵，“双重定价体系”。

121 Naughton, Growing Out of the Plan, 220-27.

121 Naughton，《走出计划》，220-27。

122 ZGTJNJ 1990, 34, 250, 49, 250, 42, 414.

122 中公济医杂志 1990, 34, 250, 49, 250, 42, 414。

123 ZGTJNJ 1990,641,653.

123 ZGTJNJ 1990,641,653。

124 Zhao Ziyang, 改革历程, 124.

124 Zhao Ziyang, 改革历程, 124.

125 Nicholas Lardy, The State Strikes Back: The End of Economic Reform in China? (Washington, DC: Peterson Institute for International Economics, 2019).

125 Nicholas Lardy，《国家反击：中国经济改革的终结？》（华盛顿特区：彼得森国际经济研究所，2019 年）。





Chapter 3. Building Neo-Authoritarianism, 1992-2002





第三章 新威权主义的构建，1992-2002年


1 Yang Jisheng, 中国改革年代的政治斗争 [Political struggles in China's reform era] (Hong Kong: Excellent Culture Press, 2004).

1 Yang Jisheng, 中国改革年代的政治斗争 [Political struggles in China's reform era] (Hong Kong: Excellent Culture Press, 2004).

2 Barry Naughton, Growing Out of the Plan: Chinese Economic Reform, 1978-1993 (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1995).

2 Barry Naughton，《走出计划：中国经济改革，1978-1993》（纽约：剑桥大学出版社，1995 年）。

3 中国统计年鉴1995 [China statistical yearbook] [hereafter cited as ZGTJNJ 1995] (Beijing: Zhongguo tongji chubanshe, 1996), 32.

3 中国统计年鉴1995 [China statistical yearbook] [hereafter cited as ZGTJNJ 1995] (Beijing: Zhongguo tongji chubanshe, 1996), 32.

4 ZGTJNJ 1995, 365.

4 ZGTJNJ 1995, 365。

5 Julian Gewirtz, Unlikely Partners: Chinese Reformers, Western Economists, and the Making of Global China (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2017), 282; Joseph Fewsmith, "Reaction, Resurgence, and Succession: Chinese Politics Since Tiananmen," in The Politics of China: Sixty Years of the People's Republic of China, ed. Roderick MacFarquhar (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2011), 3rd ed., 479-81; Richard Baum, Burying Mao: Chinese Politics in the Age of Deng Xiaoping (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1994), 326-28.

5 Julian Gewirtz，《不太可能的伙伴：中国改革者、西方经济学家和全球中国的形成》（马萨诸塞州剑桥：哈佛大学出版社，2017 年），第 282 页；Joseph Fewsmith，“反动、复兴和继承：天安门事件以来的中国政治”，载于 Roderick MacFarquhar 编，《中国政治：中华人民共和国六十年》（纽约：剑桥大学出版社，2011 年），第 3 版，第 479-81 页；Richard Baum，《埋葬毛泽东：邓小平时代的中国政治》（新泽西州普林斯顿：普林斯顿大学出版社，1994 年），第 326-28 页。

6 Stanley Rosen, "The Effect of Post-4 June Re-education Campaigns on Chinese Students," China Quarterly, no. 134 (1993): 310-34.

6 Stanley Rosen，“六四事件后再教育运动对中国学生的影响”，《中国季刊》，第134期（1993年）：310-34。

7 Baum, Burying Mao, 315-16; Hong Shi, "China's Political Development After Tiananmen," Asian Survey 30, no. 12 (1990): 1206-17.

7 Baum，《埋葬毛泽东》，315-16；洪石，“天安门事件后中国的政治发展”，《亚洲研究》30，第12期（1990年）：1206-17。

8 Yang Jisheng, 中国改革年代的政治斗争, 477; Baum, Burying Mao, 333-37.

8 Yang Jisheng, 中国改革年代的政治斗争, 477; Baum, Burying Mao, 333-37.

9 Tony Saich, From Rebel to Ruler: One Hundred Years of the Chinese Communist Party (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2021), 311-16.

9 Tony Saich，《从叛逆者到统治者：中国共产党百年史》（马萨诸塞州剑桥：哈佛大学出版社，2021 年），第 311-316 页。

10 David Shambaugh, "China in 1990: The Year of Damage Control," Asian Survey 31, no. 1 (1991): 49.

10 David Shambaugh，“1990 年的中国：危机控制之年”，《亚洲调查》31，第 1 期（1991 年）：49。

11 Fewsmith, "Reaction, Resurgence, and Succession," 482-92.

11 Fewsmith，“反应、复兴和继承”，482-92。

12 Leng Rong and Wang Zuoling, eds., 邓小平年谱下册 (1975-1997) [Deng Xiaoping chronology (1975-1997)] (Beijing: Zhongyang wenxian chubanshe, 2004), 1325-28.

12 Leng Rong and Wang Zuoling, eds., 邓小平年谱下册 (1975-1997) [Deng Xiaoping chronology (1975-1997)] (Beijing: Zhongyang wenxian chubanshe, 2004), 1325-28.

13 Gerald Segal, "China and the Disintegration of the Soviet Union," Asian Survey 32, no. 9 (1992): 848-68.

13 Gerald Segal，“中国与苏联解体”，《亚洲调查》32，第9期（1992年）：848-68。

14 John Garver, "The Chinese Communist Party and the Collapse of Soviet Communism," China Quarterly, no. 133 (1993): 15-16.

14 John Garver，“中国共产党与苏联共产主义的崩溃”，《中国季刊》，第 133 期（1993 年）：15-16。

15 "Review Your Experience and Use Professionally Trained People," August 20, 1991, in Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping, vol. 3 (1982-1992) (Beijing: Foreign Languages Press, 1994), 357.

15 “回顾你的经验，利用受过专业训练的人”，1991 年 8 月 20 日，载于邓小平选集第 3 卷（1982-1992 年）（北京：外文出版社，1994 年），第 357 页。

16 Elizabeth Perry, "China in 1992: An Experiment in Neo-Authoritarianism," Asian Survey 33, no. 1 (1993): 12-21; Barry Sautman, "Sirens of the Strongman: Neo-Authoritarianism in Recent Chinese Political Theory," The China Quarterly, no. 129 (1992): 72-102.

16 Elizabeth Perry，“1992 年的中国：新威权主义的实验”，《亚洲调查》33，第 1 期（1993 年）：12-21；Barry Sautman，“强人的警笛：近期中国政治理论中的新威权主义”，《中国季刊》129 期（1992 年）：72-102。

17 Leng and Wang, 邓小平年谱下册, 1341-46.

17 Leng and Wang, 邓小平年谱下册, 1341-46.

18 Baum, Burying Mao, 341-68; Suisheng Zhao, "Deng Xiaoping's Southern Tour," Asian Survey 33, no. 8 (1993): 739-56; ZGTJNJ 1995, 32.

18 Baum，《埋葬毛泽东》，341-68；赵穗生，《邓小平南巡》，《亚洲研究》33，第8期（1993年）：739-56；ZGTJNJ 1995，32。

19 Deng Xiaoping, “邓小平原汁原味的南方讲话” [The original Deng Xiaoping southern speech], https://finance.sina.com.cn/roll/2024-08-23/doc-inckqshv8372587.shtml. The official version of Deng's talks can be found in Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping, vol. 3 (1982-1992), 358-70.

19 Deng Xiaoping, “邓小平原汁原味的南方讲话” [The original Deng Xiaoping southern speech], https://finance.sina.com.cn/roll/2024-08-23/doc-inckqshv8372587.shtml. The official version of Deng's talks can be found in Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping, vol. 3 (1982-1992), 358-70.

20 Deng Xiaoping, “邓小平原汁原味的南方讲话”; Chris Buckley, “Vows of Change in China Belie Private Warning,” New York Times, February 14, 2013, https://www.nytimes.com/2013/02/15/world/asia/vowing-reform-chinas-leader-xi-jinping-airs-other-message-in-private.html.

20 Deng Xiaoping, “邓小平原汁原味的南方讲话”; Chris Buckley, “Vows of Change in China Belie Private Warning,” New York Times, February 14, 2013, https://www.nytimes.com/2013/02/15/world/asia/vowing-reform-chinas-leader-xi-jinping-airs-other-message-in-private.html.

21 Yang Jisheng, 中国改革年代的政治斗争, 496; Ezra Vogel, Deng Xiaoping and the Transformation of China (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2011), 679.

21 Yang Jisheng, 中国改革年代的政治斗争, 496; Ezra Vogel, Deng Xiaoping and the Transformation of China (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2011), 679.

22 Zhu Jiamu and Liu Shukai, eds., 陈云年谱（下）[Chen Yun chronology, vol. 3] (Beijing: Zhongyang wenxian chubanshe, 2000), 440-52.

22 Zhu Jiamu and Liu Shukai, eds., 陈云年谱（下）[Chen Yun chronology, vol. 3] (Beijing: Zhongyang wenxian chubanshe, 2000), 440-52.

23 James Miles, The Legacy of Tiananmen: China in Disarray (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1996).

23 James Miles，《天安门的遗产：混乱的中国》（安娜堡：密歇根大学出版社，1996 年）。

24 World Bank, "GDP per Capita, PPP (Current International $)—China," World Bank Open Data, https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.PP.CD?locations=CN.

24 世界银行，“人均GDP（按购买力平价计算，当前国际美元）—中国”，世界银行开放数据，https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.PP.CD?locations=CN。

25 Jie Chen et al., "The Level and Sources of Popular Support for China's Current Political Regime," Communist and Post-Communist Studies 30, no. 1 (1997): 45-64.

25 Jie Chen 等人，“中国现行政治制度的民众支持程度和来源”，《共产主义和后共产主义研究》30，第 1 期（1997 年）：45-64。

26 Zhu and Liu, 陈云年谱（下），442-48. Chronology of Chen's activities shows he was politically inactive and spent many months "resting."

26 朱和刘，《陈云年谱（下）》，442-448。陈云年谱显示，他在政治上不活跃，并花了数月时间“休息”。

27 Xiaowei Zang, "The Fourteenth Central Committee of the CCP," Asian Survey 33, no. 8 (1993): 787-803.

27 臧晓伟，《中共十四届中央委员会》，《亚洲研究》33，第8期（1993年）：787-803。

28 Richard Ewing, “Hu Jintao: The Making of a Chinese General Secretary,” China Quarterly, no. 173 (2003): 17-34.

28 Richard Ewing，“胡锦涛：一位中国总书记的成长”，《中国季刊》，第 173 期（2003 年）：17-34。

29 Yang Jisheng, 中国改革年代的政治斗争, 589. Zhao relayed information about this conversation with Deng to journalist Yang Jisheng on October 29, 1996, when Yang was interviewing Zhao at his residence.

29 Yang Jisheng, 中国改革年代的政治斗争, 589. Zhao relayed information about this conversation with Deng to journalist Yang Jisheng on October 29, 1996, when Yang was interviewing Zhao at his residence.

30 Other influential advocates were Wu Jiaxiang, a junior researcher on Zhao Ziyang's political reform task force, and Xiao Gongqin, a Shanghai-based historian. Liu Jun and Li Lin, eds., 新权威主义: 对改革理论纲领的论争 [New authoritarianism: Debates on theoretical reform programs] (Beijing: Beijing jingji xueyuan chubanshe, 1989); Mark Petracca and Mong Xiong, “The Concept of Chinese Neo-Authoritarianism: An Exploration and Democratic Critique,” Asian Survey 30, no. 11 (1990): 1099–1117.

30 Other influential advocates were Wu Jiaxiang, a junior researcher on Zhao Ziyang's political reform task force, and Xiao Gongqin, a Shanghai-based historian. Liu Jun and Li Lin, eds., 新权威主义: 对改革理论纲领的论争 [New authoritarianism: Debates on theoretical reform programs] (Beijing: Beijing jingji xueyuan chubanshe, 1989); Mark Petracca and Mong Xiong, “The Concept of Chinese Neo-Authoritarianism: An Exploration and Democratic Critique,” Asian Survey 30, no. 11 (1990): 1099–1117.

31 Ezra Vogel, The Four Little Dragons: The Spread of Industrialization in East Asia (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1991); Frederic Deyo, ed., The Political Economy of the New Asian Industrialism (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1987); World Bank, The East Asian Miracle: Economic Growth and Public Policy (New York: Oxford University Press, 1993).

31 Ezra Vogel，《四条小龙：工业化在东亚的传播》（马萨诸塞州剑桥：哈佛大学出版社，1991 年）；Frederic Deyo 编，《新亚洲工业主义的政治经济学》（纽约州伊萨卡：康奈尔大学出版社，1987 年）；世界银行，《东亚奇迹：经济增长与公共政策》（纽约：牛津大学出版社，1993 年）。

32 Jialin Zhang, China's Response to the Downfall of Communism in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union (Stanford, CA: Hoover Institution Press, 1994); David Shambaugh, The Chinese Communist Party: Atrophy and Adaptation (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2008).

32 张嘉林，《中国对东欧和苏联共产主义垮台的回应》（斯坦福，加州：胡佛研究所出版社，1994 年）；大卫·尚博，《中国共产党：衰落与适应》（伯克利：加州大学出版社，2008 年）。

33 Guan Guihai and Luan Jinghe, eds., “苏联解体对当代中国政治的影响” [The impact of the collapse of the Soviet Union on contemporary Chinese politics], in中俄关系的历史与现实 [Sino-Russian relations: History and reality] (Beijing: Shehui kexue wenxian chubanshe, 2009), 551-58.

33 Guan Guihai and Luan Jinghe, eds., “苏联解体对当代中国政治的影响” [The impact of the collapse of the Soviet Union on contemporary Chinese politics], in中俄关系的历史与现实 [Sino-Russian relations: History and reality] (Beijing: Shehui kexue wenxian chubanshe, 2009), 551-58.

34 Leng and Wang, 邓小平年谱下册, 1323.

34 Leng and Wang, 邓小平年谱下册, 1323.

35 Bruce J. Dickson, "The Survival Strategy of the Chinese Communist Party," Washington Quarterly 39, no. 4 (2016): 27-44.

35 Bruce J. Dickson，“中国共产党的生存战略”，《华盛顿季刊》39，第 4 期（2016 年）：27-44。

36 Zhang Lifan, “邓力群之殇与党国理论界的黄昏” [The tragedy of Deng Liquun and the twilight of party-state theoretical circles], New York Times (Chinese ed.), February 20, 2015, https://cn.nytimes.com/china/20150220/tc20dengliqun/.

36 Zhang Lifan, “邓力群之殇与党国理论界的黄昏” [The tragedy of Deng Liquun and the twilight of party-state theoretical circles], New York Times (Chinese ed.), February 20, 2015, https://cn.nytimes.com/china/20150220/tc20dengliqun/.

37 “中共中央关于建立社会主义市场经济体制若干问题的决定” [Resolution of the CCP Central Committee on several questions on establishing institutions of a socialist market economy], 中华人民共和国中央人民政府 [Central Government of the People's Republic of China], October 21, 2003, http://www.gov.cn/test/2008-08/13/content_1071062.htm.

37 “中共中央关于建立社会主义市场经济体制若干问题的决定” [Resolution of the CCP Central Committee on several questions on establishing institutions of a socialist market economy], 中华人民共和国中央人民政府 [Central Government of the People's Republic of China], October 21, 2003, http://www.gov.cn/test/2008-08/13/content_1071062.htm.

38 “关于党内政治生活的若干准则”[Some guidelines on political life in the party], 人民网 [People's daily online], February 29, 1980, http://dangjian.people.com.cn/GB/136058/427510/428086/428088/428312/index.html.

38 “关于党内政治生活的若干准则”[Some guidelines on political life in the party], 人民网 [People's daily online], February 29, 1980, http://dangjian.people.com.cn/GB/136058/427510/428086/428088/428312/index.html.

39 “党政领导干部选拔任用工作条例；中国共产党纪律处分条例（试行）”[Trial regulations on the selection and appointment of party and government leading cadres; regulations on Chinese Communist Party disciplinary punishments],中共中央办公厅法规局 [Regulations Bureau of the General Office of the Central Committee], “国共产党党内法规体系” [Regulations on Chinese Communist Party discipline and sanctions], 中华人民共和国中央人民政府 [Central Government of the People's Republic of China], July 2021, http://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2021-08/06/content_5629962.htm.

39 “党政领导干部选拔任用工作条例；中国共产党纪律处分条例（试行）”[Trial regulations on the selection and appointment of party and government leading cadres; regulations on Chinese Communist Party disciplinary punishments],中共中央办公厅法规局 [Regulations Bureau of the General Office of the Central Committee], “国共产党党内法规体系” [Regulations on Chinese Communist Party discipline and sanctions], 中华人民共和国中央人民政府 [Central Government of the People's Republic of China], July 2021, http://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2021-08/06/content_5629962.htm.

40 Pierre Landry, Decentralized Authoritarianism in China: The Control of Local Elites in the Post-Mao Era (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2008); Joseph Fewsmith, Elite Politics in Contemporary China (London: Routledge, 2015); Jiangnan Zhu, "Why Are Offices for Sale in China? A Case Study of the Office-Selling Chain in Heilongjiang Province," Asian Survey 48, no. 4 (2008): 558-79.

40 Pierre Landry，《中国的权力下放：后毛泽东时代地方精英的控制》（纽约：剑桥大学出版社，2008 年）；Joseph Fewsmith，《当代中国的精英政治》（伦敦：Routledge 出版社，2015 年）；朱江南，《为什么中国的办公室要出售？以黑龙江省的办公室买卖链为例》，《亚洲调查》48，第 4 期（2008 年）：558-79。

41 Victor Shih et al., "Getting Ahead in the Communist Party: Explaining the Advancement of Central Committee Members in China," American Political Science Review 106, no. 1 (2012): 166-87.

41 Victor Shih 等人，“在共产党内晋升：解释中国中央委员会成员的晋升”，《美国政治科学评论》106，第 1 期（2012 年）：166-87。

42 Andrew Walder, "Rebellion of the Cadres: The 1967 Implosion of the Chinese Party-State," China Journal, no. 75 (2016): 102-20.

42 Andrew Walder，“干部叛乱：1967 年中国党国的内爆”，《中国期刊》，第 75 期（2016 年）：102-20。

43 Zengke He, "Corruption and Anti-Corruption in Reform China," Communist and Post-Communist Studies 33, no. 2 (2000): 243-70.

43 何增科，《改革中国的腐败与反腐败》，共产主义与后共产主义研究 33，第 2 期（2000 年）：243-70。

44 Central Commission for Discipline Inspection, “中央纪委关于处分违犯党纪的党员批准权限的具体规定”[Specific provisions on approval authority for punishing party members who violate party discipline], 法律法规库 [Library of laws and regulations], July 6, 1983, https://www.flfgk.com/detail/6a986a4bda844c5aa686b0117132a192.html.

44 Central Commission for Discipline Inspection, “中央纪委关于处分违犯党纪的党员批准权限的具体规定”[Specific provisions on approval authority for punishing party members who violate party discipline], 法律法规库 [Library of laws and regulations], July 6, 1983, https://www.flfgk.com/detail/6a986a4bda844c5aa686b0117132a192.html.

45 Bo Zhiyue, China's Elite Politics: Political Transition and Power Balancing (Singapore: World Scientific, 2007).

45 薄志岳，《中国精英政治：政治转型与权力平衡》（新加坡：世界科学出版社，2007 年）。

46 “李瑞环告别政协退出政坛”[Li Ruihuan bids farewell to the CPPCC and retires from politics], VOA (Chinese), March 5, 2003, https://www.voachinese.com/a/a-21-a-2003-03-05-22-1-63435732/1002079.html.

46 “李瑞环告别政协退出政坛”[Li Ruihuan bids farewell to the CPPCC and retires from politics], VOA (Chinese), March 5, 2003, https://www.voachinese.com/a/a-21-a-2003-03-05-22-1-63435732/1002079.html.

47 Andrew Nathan, "China's Resilient Authoritarianism," Journal of Democracy 14, no. 1 (2003): 6-17; Frederick Teiwes, "Normal Politics with Chinese Characteristics," China Journal, no. 45 (2001): 69-82.

47 Andrew Nathan，“中国的韧性威权主义”，《民主杂志》14，第1期（2003年）：6-17；Frederick Teiwes，“具有中国特色的正常政治”，《中国杂志》45期（2001年）：69-82。

48 Joseph Fewsmith, Rethinking Chinese Politics (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2021).

48 Joseph Fewsmith，《重新思考中国政治》（纽约：剑桥大学出版社，2021 年）。

49 Leng and Wang, 邓小平年谱下册, 1280.

49 Leng and Wang, 邓小平年谱下册, 1280.

50 State Education Commission, 《中小学加强中国近代现代史及国情教育的总体纲要》（初稿）[General Outline of Strengthening Education on Modern History and National Conditions in Primary and Secondary Schools (first draft)] (Beijing: People's Education Press, 1991); “关于充分运用文物进行爱国主义和革命传统教育的通知” [Notice on the full use of cultural relics for education on patriotism and the revolutionary tradition], 法律法规库 [Library of laws and regulations], August 28, 1991, https://www.flfgk.com/detail/5e117729ee28e77bb8e8e9790241fe55.html.

50 State Education Commission, 《中小学加强中国近代现代史及国情教育的总体纲要》（初稿）[General Outline of Strengthening Education on Modern History and National Conditions in Primary and Secondary Schools (first draft)] (Beijing: People's Education Press, 1991); “关于充分运用文物进行爱国主义和革命传统教育的通知” [Notice on the full use of cultural relics for education on patriotism and the revolutionary tradition], 法律法规库 [Library of laws and regulations], August 28, 1991, https://www.flfgk.com/detail/5e117729ee28e77bb8e8e9790241fe55.html.

51 State Council, 爱国主义教育实施纲要 [Outline on implementation of patriotic education], 国务院公报 [State Council gazette], September 20, 1990, http://www.gov.cn/gongbao/shuju/1994/gwyb199420.pdf.

51 State Council, 爱国主义教育实施纲要 [Outline on implementation of patriotic education], 国务院公报 [State Council gazette], September 20, 1990, http://www.gov.cn/gongbao/shuju/1994/gwyb199420.pdf.

52 Suisheng Zhao, "A State-Led Nationalism: The Patriotic Education Campaign in Post-Tiananmen China," Communist and Post-Communist Studies 31, no. 3 (1998): 287-302.

52 赵穗生，《国家领导的民族主义：后天安门时代的中国爱国主义教育运动》，《共产主义与后共产主义研究》31，第3期（1998年）：287-302。

53 Wang Dehua and Li Yali, “新形势下高校爱国主义教育的实践与启示” [Practice and enlightenment of patriotic education in colleges and universities under the new situation], 思想理论教育 [Ideological and theoretical education], no. 3 (1994): 45-48; Political and Education Department, Yunnan Provincial Education Commission, “高扬主旋律用多种载体营造大氛围” [Highlighting the main melody and using a variety of carriers to create a grand atmosphere], 思想理论教育 [Ideological and theoretical education], no. 4 (1995): 8-10.

53 Wang Dehua and Li Yali, “新形势下高校爱国主义教育的实践与启示” [Practice and enlightenment of patriotic education in colleges and universities under the new situation], 思想理论教育 [Ideological and theoretical education], no. 3 (1994): 45-48; Political and Education Department, Yunnan Provincial Education Commission, “高扬主旋律用多种载体营造大氛围” [Highlighting the main melody and using a variety of carriers to create a grand atmosphere], 思想理论教育 [Ideological and theoretical education], no. 4 (1995): 8-10.

54 Zheng Wang, "National Humiliation, History Education, and the Politics of Historical Memory: Patriotic Education Campaign in China," International Studies Quarterly 52, no. 4 (2008): 783-806.

54 郑望，“民族耻辱、历史教育与历史记忆政治：中国的爱国主义教育运动”，国际研究季刊 52，第 4 期（2008 年）：783-806。

55 Zhu Xinjun, “大力加强高校爱国主义教育” [Vigorously strengthen patriotic education in colleges and universities], 高等教育 [Higher education], no. 1 (1996): 10-13.

55 Zhu Xinjun, “大力加强高校爱国主义教育” [Vigorously strengthen patriotic education in colleges and universities], 高等教育 [Higher education], no. 1 (1996): 10-13.

56 Xu Suping, “高校爱国主义教育的重点内容”[Key contents of patriotic education in colleges and universities], 安徽大学学报 [Journal of Anhui University], no. 3 (1995): 76-77.

56 Xu Suping, “高校爱国主义教育的重点内容”[Key contents of patriotic education in colleges and universities], 安徽大学学报 [Journal of Anhui University], no. 3 (1995): 76-77.

57 Zheng Wang, Never Forget National Humiliation: Historical Memory in Chinese Politics and Foreign Relations (New York: Columbia University Press, 2014).

57 郑望，《永不忘记民族耻辱：中国政治和外交关系中的历史记忆》（纽约：哥伦比亚大学出版社，2014 年）。

58 Andrew Scobell, "Show of Force: Chinese Soldiers, Statesmen, and the 1995-1996 Taiwan Strait Crisis," Political Science Quarterly 115, no. 2 (2000): 227-46.

58 Andrew Scobell，“武力展示：中国士兵、政治家和 1995-1996 年台湾海峡危机”，《政治学季刊》115，第 2 期（2000 年）：227-46。

59 Peter Hays Gries, "Tears of Rage: Chinese Nationalist Reactions to the Belgrade Embassy Bombing," China Journal, no. 46 (2001): 25-43.

59 Peter Hays Gries，“愤怒的眼泪：中国民族主义者对贝尔格莱德大使馆爆炸案的反应”，《中国杂志》，第46期（2001年）：25-43。

60 Peter Hays Gries, China's New Nationalism: Pride, Politics, and Diplomacy (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2004); Suisheng Zhao, A Nation-State by Construction: Dynamics of Modern Chinese Nationalism (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2004).

60 Peter Hays Gries，《中国的新民族主义：自豪、政治和外交》（伯克利：加州大学出版社，2004 年）；赵穗生，《建构中的民族国家：现代中国民族主义的动力》（斯坦福，加州：斯坦福大学出版社，2004 年）。

61 Yuhua Wang and Carl Minzner, "The Rise of the Chinese Security State," China Quarterly, no. 222 (2015): 339-59.

61 王玉华和卡尔·明兹纳，《中国安全国家的崛起》，《中国季刊》，第222期（2015年）：339-59。

62 “中共中央关于维护社会稳定加强政法工作的通知”[Notice of the Central Committee on maintaining social stability and strengthening political and legal work], 中国改革信息库 [China reform information database], April 2, 1990, http://www.reformdata.org/1990/0402/4106.shtml.

62 “中共中央关于维护社会稳定加强政法工作的通知”[Notice of the Central Committee on maintaining social stability and strengthening political and legal work], 中国改革信息库 [China reform information database], April 2, 1990, http://www.reformdata.org/1990/0402/4106.shtml.

63 “中共中央、国务院关于加强社会治安综合治理的决定”[Decision of the Central Committee and State Council on strengthening comprehensive management of public security], 中国改革信息库 [China reform information database], February 19, 1991, http://www.reformdata.org/1991/0219/4159.shtml.

63 “中共中央、国务院关于加强社会治安综合治理的决定”[Decision of the Central Committee and State Council on strengthening comprehensive management of public security], 中国改革信息库 [China reform information database], February 19, 1991, http://www.reformdata.org/1991/0219/4159.shtml.

64 公检法支出财务统计资料，1991-1995 [Financial statistics on expenditures by the Public Security Bureau, 1991-1995] (Nanjing: Jiangsu keji chubanshe, 1991), 166, 169; ZGTJNJ 2003 [China statistical yearbook 2003] (Beijing: Zhongguo tongji chubanshe, 2004), 292.

64 公检法支出财务统计资料，1991-1995 [Financial statistics on expenditures by the Public Security Bureau, 1991-1995] (Nanjing: Jiangsu keji chubanshe, 1991), 166, 169; ZGTJNJ 2003 [China statistical yearbook 2003] (Beijing: Zhongguo tongji chubanshe, 2004), 292.

65 1987-1997 中国法律年鉴（珍藏版）[1987-1997 China legal yearbook (collector's edition)] (Beijing: Zhongguo falu nianjianshe, 1998), 778; Shen Xiaohong et al., “基层公安机关警力配置现状与思考” [The current situation and reflections on allocation of the police force in grassroots public security organs], 江西警察学院学报 [Journal of Jiangxi Public Security College], no. 4 (July 2010): 107. No official data on the size of the police force nationwide in the 1990s or early 2000s are available.

65 1987-1997 中国法律年鉴（珍藏版）[1987-1997 China legal yearbook (collector's edition)] (Beijing: Zhongguo falu nianjianshe, 1998), 778; Shen Xiaohong et al., “基层公安机关警力配置现状与思考” [The current situation and reflections on allocation of the police force in grassroots public security organs], 江西警察学院学报 [Journal of Jiangxi Public Security College], no. 4 (July 2010): 107. No official data on the size of the police force nationwide in the 1990s or early 2000s are available.

66 湖北公安志 [Hubei public security chronicle] (N.p.: Hubeigong'an ting, 2010), 259; 浙江通志: 公安志 [Zhejiang general chronicle: Public security chronicle] (Hangzhou: Zhejiang renmin chubanshe, 2018), 63.

66 湖北公安志 [Hubei public security chronicle] (N.p.: Hubeigong'an ting, 2010), 259; 浙江通志: 公安志 [Zhejiang general chronicle: Public security chronicle] (Hangzhou: Zhejiang renmin chubanshe, 2018), 63.

67 王溪市年鉴 1990 [Yuxi City yearbook, 1990] (Yuxi: Yuxishi difangzhi bangongting, 1990), 301; Tai Ming Cheung, “Guarding China's Domestic Front Line: The People's Armed Police and China's Stability,” China Quarterly, no. 146 (1996): 525-47.

67 王溪市年鉴 1990 [玉溪市年鉴，1990] (玉溪：玉溪市地方志出版社，1990)，301；张泰明，《守卫中国国内前线：人民武警与中国稳定》，《中国季刊》，146 (1996)：525-47。

68 建国以来公安工作大事要览 [Overview of major events in public security work since the founding of the People's Republic of China] (Beijing: Qunzhong chubanshe, 2003), 820, 917, 932, 1084-85, 1132, 1141.

68 建国以来公安工作大事要览 [Overview of major events in public security work since the founding of the People's Republic of China] (Beijing: Qunzhong chubanshe, 2003), 820, 917, 932, 1084-85, 1132, 1141.

69 陕西省志：公安志 [Shaanxi provincial chronicle: Public security chronicle] (Xi'an: Shaanxi renmin chubanshe, 2011), 554-58.

69 陕西省志：公安志 [Shaanxi provincial chronicle: Public security chronicle] (Xi'an: Shaanxi renmin chubanshe, 2011), 554-58.

70 建国以来公安工作大事要览，880.

70 建国以来公安工作大事要览，880.

71 建国以来公安工作大事要览,988,1073-74,1227.

71 建国以来公安工作大事要览,988,1073-74,1227.

72 Denny Roy, "Singapore, China, and the 'Soft Authoritarian' Challenge," Asian Survey 34, no. 3 (1994): 231-42; Edwin Winckler, "Institutionalization and Participation on Taiwan: From Hard to Soft Authoritarianism?" China Quarterly, no. 99 (1984): 481-99.

72 Denny Roy，“新加坡、中国和‘软性威权主义’的挑战”，《亚洲调查》34，第3期（1994年）：231-42；Edwin Winckler，“台湾的制度化和参与：从硬性威权主义到软性威权主义？”，《中国季刊》99期（1984年）：481-99。

73 Kevin O'Brien and Yanhua Deng, "Preventing Protest One Person at a Time: Psychological Coercion and Relational Repression in China," China Review 17, no. 2 (2017): 179-201; Lynette Ong, "Thugs-for-Hire': Subcontracting of State Coercion and State Capacity in China," Perspectives on Politics 16, no. 3 (2018): 680-95; Rory Truex, "Focal Points, Dissident Calendars, and Preemptive Repression," Journal of Conflict Resolution 63, no. 4 (2019): 1032-52.

73 Kevin O'Brien 和 Yanhua Deng，“逐人阻止抗议：中国的心理胁迫和关系镇压”，《中国评论》17，第 2 期（2017 年）：179-201；Lynette Ong，“雇佣暴徒：中国国家胁迫和国家能力的外包”，《政治视角》16，第 3 期（2018 年）：680-95；Rory Truex，“焦点、异议人士日程和先发制人的镇压”，《冲突解决杂志》63，第 4 期（2019 年）：1032-52。

74 Ware Fong, "Depoliticization, Politicization, and Criminalization: How China Has Been Handling Political Prisoners Since 1980s," Journal of Chinese Political Science 24, no. 2 (2019): 315-39; Michael Sullivan, "Development and Political Repression: China's Human Rights Policy Since 1989," Bulletin of Concerned Asian Scholars 27, no. 4 (1995): 24-39.

74 方伟，“去政治化、政治化和犯罪化：中国自 20 世纪 80 年代以来如何处理政治犯”，《中国政治学杂志》24，第 2 期（2019 年）：315-39；迈克尔·沙利文，“发展与政治镇压：1989 年以来中国的人权政策”，《亚洲关注学者公报》27，第 4 期（1995 年）：24-39。

75 James Tong, Revenge of the Forbidden City: The Suppression of the Falungong in China, 1999–2005 (New York: Oxford University Press, 2009).

75 James Tong，《紫禁城的复仇：1999-2005年中国对法轮功的镇压》（纽约：牛津大学出版社，2009年）。

76 Xiao Sa, “论党的阶级基础与群众基础”[On the party's class and mass foundations], 云南省社会科学院 [Yunnan Academy of Social Sciences], November 3, 2010, http://www.skyyn.gov.cn/ztzl/yq30zn/zgwj/zxyjs/637351293615183996.

76 Xiao Sa, “论党的阶级基础与群众基础”[On the party's class and mass foundations], 云南省社会科学院 [Yunnan Academy of Social Sciences], November 3, 2010, http://www.skyyn.gov.cn/ztzl/yq30zn/zgwj/zxyjs/637351293615183996.

77 大专及以上（college-level education and higher）refers to a three-year college education or higher. Central Organization Department, “中国共产党党内统计资料汇编 (1921-2010)” [Compilation of statistical data on the Communist Party of China (1921-2010)] (Beijing: Dangjian duwu chubanshe, 2011), 48-49.

77 大专及以上（college-level education and higher）refers to a three-year college education or higher. Central Organization Department, “中国共产党党内统计资料汇编 (1921-2010)” [Compilation of statistical data on the Communist Party of China (1921-2010)] (Beijing: Dangjian duwu chubanshe, 2011), 48-49.

78 “关于加强党的建设几个重大问题的决定” [Decision of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China on several major issues concerning strengthening party building], 中共中国人民大学委员会党校 [Party Committee of the Party School of People's University], June 11, 2016, http://dangxiao.ruc.edu.cn/llxx/llqy/hygb/99cb834ed166416e8391a58b8d3da4f3.htm.

78 “关于加强党的建设几个重大问题的决定” [Decision of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China on several major issues concerning strengthening party building], 中共中国人民大学委员会党校 [Party Committee of the Party School of People's University], June 11, 2016, http://dangxiao.ruc.edu.cn/llxx/llqy/hygb/99cb834ed166416e8391a58b8d3da4f3.htm.

79 Xiaowei Zang, "University Education, Party Seniority, and Elite Recruitment in China," Social Science Research 30, no. 1 (2001): 62-75; Guihua Xie and Yangyang Zhang, "Seeking Out the Party: A Study of the Communist Party of China's Membership Recruitment Among Chinese College Students," Chinese Journal of Sociology 3, no. 1 (2017): 98-134.

79 臧晓伟，《中国大学教育、党龄与精英招募》，社会科学研究 30，第 1 期（2001 年）：62-75；谢桂华、张阳阳，《寻求党：中国大学生党员招募研究》，中国社会学杂志 3，第 1 期（2017 年）：98-134。

80 “中共中央组织部、中共教育部党组、共青团中央关于加强和改进在大学生中发展党员工作和大学生党支部建设的意见”[Opinions of the Organization Department, the party group of the Ministry of Education, and the Central Committee of the CYL on strengthening and improving the development of party members among college students and the construction of party branches among college students], 中华人民共和国自然资源部 [Ministry of Natural Resources of the People's Republic of China], May 24, 2016, https://m.mnr.gov.cn/zt/dj/jgdj/ztjy/lxyz/d/201812/t20181203_2371769.html.

80 “中共中央组织部、中共教育部党组、共青团中央关于加强和改进在大学生中发展党员工作和大学生党支部建设的意见”[Opinions of the Organization Department, the party group of the Ministry of Education, and the Central Committee of the CYL on strengthening and improving the development of party members among college students and the construction of party branches among college students], 中华人民共和国自然资源部 [Ministry of Natural Resources of the People's Republic of China], May 24, 2016, https://m.mnr.gov.cn/zt/dj/jgdj/ztjy/lxyz/d/201812/t20181203_2371769.html.

81 Ma Xueling and Xiao Yuanyuan, “青春与信仰 聚焦中国大学生党员群体”[Youth and faith focus on Chinese university student party members], 中国新闻网 [China News Network], June 28, 2011, https://www.chinanews.com.cn/gn/2011/06-28/3142241.shtml.

81 Ma Xueling and Xiao Yuanyuan, “青春与信仰 聚焦中国大学生党员群体”[Youth and faith focus on Chinese university student party members], 中国新闻网 [China News Network], June 28, 2011, https://www.chinanews.com.cn/gn/2011/06-28/3142241.shtml.

82 Xiaojun Yan, "Engineering Stability: Authoritarian Political Control Over University Students in Post-Deng China," China Quarterly, no. 218 (2014): 493-513.

82 严晓军，《工程稳定：后邓小平时代中国对大学生的威权政治控制》，《中国季刊》，218（2014）：493-513。

83 中共中央组织部，中国共产党党内统计资料汇编（1921-2010），48-51.

83 中共中央组织部，中国共产党党内统计资料汇编（1921-2010），48-51.

84 Xiao Sa, “论党的阶级基础与群众基础”

84 Xiao Sa, “论党的阶级基础与群众基础”

85 Zhou Yingfeng, “我国目前有党员8260.2万名基层党组织402.7万个”[Our country currently has 82.602 million party members and 4.027 million grassroots party organizations], 新华社 [New China News Agency], June 30, 2012, http://www.gov.cn/jrzg/2012-06/30/content_2174072.htm. Official data for 2021 reported that 53 percent of party members had a college-level education or higher, but they did not disclose the share of workers and peasants. “党员9671.2万名基层党组织493.6万个” [There are 96.712 million party members and 4.936 million grassroots party organizations], 新华社 [New China News Agency], June 29, 2022, http://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2022-06/29/content_5698405.htm.

85 Zhou Yingfeng, “我国目前有党员8260.2万名基层党组织402.7万个”[Our country currently has 82.602 million party members and 4.027 million grassroots party organizations], 新华社 [New China News Agency], June 30, 2012, http://www.gov.cn/jrzg/2012-06/30/content_2174072.htm. Official data for 2021 reported that 53 percent of party members had a college-level education or higher, but they did not disclose the share of workers and peasants. “党员9671.2万名基层党组织493.6万个” [There are 96.712 million party members and 4.936 million grassroots party organizations], 新华社 [New China News Agency], June 29, 2022, http://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2022-06/29/content_5698405.htm.

86 “江泽民在庆祝中共成立80周年大会上的讲话”[Jiang Zemin's speech at the conference celebrating the 80th anniversary of the founding of the Communist Party of China], 中国新闻网 [China News Network], July 2, 2001, https://www.chinanews.com.cn/2001-07-02/26/101847.html.

86 “江泽民在庆祝中共成立80周年大会上的讲话”[Jiang Zemin's speech at the conference celebrating the 80th anniversary of the founding of the Communist Party of China], 中国新闻网 [China News Network], July 2, 2001, https://www.chinanews.com.cn/2001-07-02/26/101847.html.

87 中国私营企业发展报告 2002 [China private enterprise development report 2002] (Beijing: Shehui kexue wenxian chubanshe, 2003), 4-5; ZGTJNJ 2004 (Beijing: Zhongguo tongji chubanshe, 2005), 53.

87 中国私营企业发展报告 2002 [China private enterprise development report 2002] (Beijing: Shehui kexue wenxian chubanshe, 2003), 4-5; ZGTJNJ 2004 (Beijing: Zhongguo tongji chubanshe, 2005), 53.

88 中国私营企业发展报告 2002,31.

88 中国私营企业发展报告 2002,31.

89 中国私营企业发展报告 2002,31.

89 中国私营企业发展报告 2002,31.

90 Central Organization Department, 2008年中国共产党党内统计公报 [2008 internal-party statistical bulletin of the Communist Party of China], 复旦大学党委组织部 [Organization Department of the Party Committee of Fudan University], July 1, 2009, https://zzb.fudan.edu.cn/62/10/c2623a25104/page.htm.

90 Central Organization Department, 2008年中国共产党党内统计公报 [2008 internal-party statistical bulletin of the Communist Party of China], 复旦大学党委组织部 [Organization Department of the Party Committee of Fudan University], July 1, 2009, https://zzb.fudan.edu.cn/62/10/c2623a25104/page.htm.

91 Bruce Dickson, Red Capitalists in China: The Party, Private Entrepreneurs, and Prospects for Political Change (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2003); Jie Chen and Bruce Dickson, Allies of the State: China's Private Entrepreneurs and Democratic Change (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2010).

91 Bruce Dickson，《中国的红色资本家：党、私营企业家和政治变革的前景》（纽约：剑桥大学出版社，2003 年）；Jie Chen 和 Bruce Dickson，《国家的盟友：中国的私营企业家和民主变革》（马萨诸塞州剑桥：哈佛大学出版社，2010 年）。

92 Xiaojun Yan, "Regime Inclusion and the Resilience of Authoritarianism: The Local People's Political Consultative Conference in Post-Mao Chinese Politics," China Journal, no. 66 (2011): 53-75; Yue Hou, The Private Sector in Public Office: Selective Property Rights in China (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2019).

92 严晓军，《政权包容与威权主义的韧性：后毛泽东时代中国政治中的地方人民政治协商会议》，《中国期刊》，第66期（2011年）：53-75；侯岳，《公职中的私营部门：中国的选择性产权》（纽约：剑桥大学出版社，2019年）。

93 ZGTJNJ 1995, 61.

93 OGTJNJ 1995, 61。

94 Ben Hillman and Gray Tuttle, eds., Ethnic Conflict and Protest in Tibet and Xinjiang: Unrest in China's West (New York: Columbia University Press, 2016); James Tong, "Anatomy of Regime Repression in China: Timing, Enforcement Institutions, and Target Selection in Banning the Falungong, July 1999," Asian Survey 42, no. 6 (2002): 795-820; Feng Chen, "Industrial Restructuring and Workers' Resistance in China," Modern China 29, no. 2 (2003): 237-62.

94 Ben Hillman 和 Gray Tuttle 编，《西藏和新疆的民族冲突与抗议：中国西部的动荡》（纽约：哥伦比亚大学出版社，2016 年）；James Tong，“中国政权镇压的剖析：1999 年 7 月禁止法轮功的时机、执法机构和目标选择”，《亚洲调查》42，第 6 期（2002 年）：795-820；冯晨，“中国的产业结构调整和工人抵抗”，《现代中国》29，第 2 期（2003 年）：237-62。

95 Pitman Potter, "The Chinese Legal System: Continuing Commitment to the Primacy of State Power," China Quarterly, no. 159 (1999): 673-83; Stanley Lubman, Bird in a Cage: Legal Reform in China After Mao (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1999); Randall Peerenboom, China's Long March Toward Rule of Law (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2002).

95 Pitman Potter，“中国法律制度：对国家权力至上原则的持续承诺”，《中国季刊》，第 159 期（1999 年）：673-83；Stanley Lubman，《笼中鸟：毛泽东之后中国的法律改革》（斯坦福，加利福尼亚州：斯坦福大学出版社，1999 年）；Randall Peerenboom，《中国迈向法治的长征》（纽约：剑桥大学出版社，2002 年）。

96 Robert Pastor and Qingshan Tan, "The Meaning of China's Village Elections," China Quarterly, no. 162 (2000): 490-512; Kevin O'Brien and Rongbin Han, "Path to Democracy? Assessing Village Elections in China," Journal of Contemporary China 18, no. 60 (2009): 359-78; Joseph Fewsmith, The Logic and Limits of Political Reform in China (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2013).

96 Robert Pastor 和 Qingshan Tan，“中国乡村选举的意义”，《中国季刊》第 162 期（2000 年）：490-512；Kevin O'Brien 和 Rongbin Han，“通往民主之路？评估中国的乡村选举”，《当代中国》第 18 卷第 60 期（2009 年）：359-78；Joseph Fewsmith，《中国政治改革的逻辑与局限》（纽约：剑桥大学出版社，2013 年）。

97 Andrew Wedeman, "Anticorruption Campaigns and the Intensification of Corruption in China," Journal of Contemporary China 14, no. 42 (2005): 93-116; Ting Gong, "Dangerous Collusion: Corruption as a Collective Venture in Contemporary China," Communist and PostCommunist Studies 35, no. 1 (2002): 85-103; Jiangnan Zhu, "Why are Offices for Sale in China? A Case Study of the Office-Selling Chain in Heilongjiang Province," Asian Survey 48, no. 4 (2008): 558-79.

97 Andrew Wedeman，“反腐败运动与中国腐败的加剧”，《当代中国》14，第42期（2005年）：93-116；龚婷，“危险的勾结：当代中国的腐败集体行为”，《共产主义与后共产主义研究》35，第1期（2002年）：85-103；朱江南，“为什么中国的办公室要出售？以黑龙江省的办公室买卖连锁为例”，《亚洲调查》48，第4期（2008年）：558-79。

98 Shawn Shieh, "The Rise of Collective Corruption in China: The Xiamen Smuggling Case," Journal of Contemporary China 14, no. 42 (2005): 67-91.

98 谢晓文，《中国集体腐败的兴起：厦门走私案》，《当代中国》14，第42期（2005年）：67-91。

99 Murray Scot Tanner, "China Rethinks Unrest," Washington Quarterly 27, no. 3 (2004): 137-56.

99 Murray Scot Tanner，“中国重新思考动荡”，《华盛顿季刊》27，第3期（2004年）：137-56。

100 Jianrong Yu, "Social Conflict in Rural China," China Security 3, no. 2 (2007): 2-17; Christian Goebel, "Social Unrest in China: A Bird's-Eye View," in Handbook of Protest and Resistance in China, ed. Teresa Wright (Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 2019), 27-45.

100 于建荣，《中国农村的社会冲突》，《中国安全》3，第 2 期（2007 年）：2-17；克里斯蒂安·戈贝尔，《中国的社会动荡：鸟瞰》，载《中国抗议与抵抗手册》，特蕾莎·赖特编（英国切尔滕纳姆：爱德华·埃尔加出版社，2019 年），27-45。

101 Joel Hellman, "Winners Take All: The Politics of Partial Reform in Postcommunist Transitions," World Politics 50, no. 2 (1998): 203-34.

101 Joel Hellman，“赢家通吃：后共产主义转型中的部分改革政治”，《世界政治》50，第 2 期（1998 年）：203-34。

102 Minxin Pei, China's Trapped Transition: The Limits of Developmental Autocracy (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2006).

102 裴敏欣，《中国转型困境：发展型专制的局限性》（马萨诸塞州剑桥：哈佛大学出版社，2006 年）。





Chapter 4. Stagnation in the Hu Jintao Era





第四章 胡锦涛时代的停滞


1 Of the nine members, at least four—Huang Ju, Wu Bangguo, Zeng Qinghong, and Jia Qingling—were Jiang's close associates.

九名成员中，至少有四人——黄菊、吴邦国、曾庆红和贾庆玲——是江泽民的亲信。

2 ZGTJNJ 2003, 67.

2 OGTJNJ 2003, 67。

3 World Bank, https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SI.POV.GINI?locations=CN.

3 世界银行，https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SI.POV.GINI?locations=CN。

4 World Bank, "Out-of-Pocket Health Expenditure (% of Current Health Expenditure)," 2023, https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SH.XPD.OOPC.CH.ZS. The world average, according to the World Bank, was 19.3 percent in 2020. I cannot find data on the world average in 2002, so I use data for 2020.

4 世界银行，《个人自付医疗支出（占当前医疗支出的百分比）》，2023 年，https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SH.XPD.OOPC.CH.ZS。根据世界银行的数据，2020 年全球平均水平为 19.3%。我找不到 2002 年的全球平均数据，因此我使用 2020 年的数据。

5 Data for 1990 and 1994 calculated from data in ZGTJNJ 1995, 692, and ZGTJNJ 2005, e-book; data for 1998-2002 obtained from ZGTJNJ 2005, e-book.

5 1990 年和 1994 年的数据根据 ZGTJNJ 1995、692 和 ZGTJNJ 2005 电子书中的数据计算得出；1998-2002 年的数据来自 ZGTJNJ 2005 电子书。

6 Jonathan Schwartz and R. Gregory Evans, "Causes of Effective Policy Implementation: China's Public Health Response to SARS," Journal of Contemporary China 16, no. 51 (2007): 195-213; Yanzhong Huang, Governing Health in Contemporary China (London: Routledge, 2013), 82-111.

6 Jonathan Schwartz 和 R. Gregory Evans，“有效政策实施的原因：中国对 SARS 的公共卫生应对”，《当代中国杂志》16，第 51 期（2007 年）：195-213；黄彦中，《当代中国的健康治理》（伦敦：Routledge，2013 年），82-111。

7 Hu Jintao, “把促进经济社会协调发展摆到更加突出的位置”[Put promotion of coordinated economic and social development in a more prominent position], in胡锦涛文选第二卷 [Selected works of Hu Jintao, vol. 2] (Beijing: Renmin chubanshe, 2016), 65-77.

7 Hu Jintao, “把促进经济社会协调发展摆到更加突出的位置”[Put promotion of coordinated economic and social development in a more prominent position], in胡锦涛文选第二卷 [Selected works of Hu Jintao, vol. 2] (Beijing: Renmin chubanshe, 2016), 65-77.

8 Hu Jintao, “构建社会主义和谐社会” [Building a socialist harmonious society], in 胡锦涛文选第二卷, 273-99.

8 Hu Jintao, “构建社会主义和谐社会” [Building a socialist harmonious society], in 胡锦涛文选第二卷, 273-99.

9 ZGTJNJ 2006, 2007, https://www.stats.gov.cn/sj/ndsj/.

9 国家统计局 2006、2007，https://www.stats.gov.cn/sj/ndsj/。

10 Wusheng Yu and Hans G. Jensen, "China's Agricultural Policy Transition: Impacts of Recent Reforms and Future Scenarios," Journal of Agricultural Economics 61, no. 2 (2010): 343-68.

10 余武生和汉斯·G·詹森，“中国的农业政策转型：近期改革的影响和未来情景”，《农业经济学杂志》61，第2期（2010年）：343-68。

11 Xiaxin Wang and Yan Shen, "The Effect of China's Agricultural Tax Abolition on Rural Families' Incomes and Production," China Economic Review, no. 29 (2014): 185-99; Jianrong Yu, "Social Conflict in Rural China," China Security 3, no. 2 (2007): 2-17.

11 王夏新、沈岩，《中国农业税取消对农村家庭收入和生产的影响》，《中国经济评论》，29（2014）：185-99；于建荣，《中国农村的社会冲突》，《中国安全》，3，2（2007）：2-17。

12 Keith Hand, "Using Law for a Righteous Purpose: The Sun Zhigang Incident and Evolving Forms of Citizen Action in the People's Republic of China," Columbia Journal of Transnational Law, no. 45 (2006): 114-95.

12 Keith Hand，“为正义目的运用法律：孙志刚事件与中华人民共和国公民行动形式的演变”，《哥伦比亚跨国法杂志》，第 45 期（2006 年）：114-95。

13 ZGTJNJ 2014, e-book.

13 ZGTJNJ 2014，电子书。

14 Ling Li et al., "Chinese Healthcare Reform: A Shift Toward Social Development," Modern China 38, no. 6 (2012): 630-45.

14 Ling Li 等人，“中国医疗改革：向社会发展转变”，《现代中国》38，第 6 期（2012 年）：630-45。

15 ZGTJNJ 2008, e-book, https://www.stats.gov.cn/sj/ndsj/.

15 ZGTJNJ 2008，电子书，https://www.stats.gov.cn/sj/ndsj/。

16 Pierre Landry et al., "Does Performance Matter? Evaluating Political Selection Along the Chinese Administrative Ladder," Comparative Political Studies 51, no. 8 (2018): 1074-1105.

16 Pierre Landry 等人，“绩效重要吗？评估中国行政阶梯上的政治选拔”，《比较政治研究》51，第 8 期（2018 年）：1074-1105。

17 Andrew G. Walder, "China's Extreme Inequality: The Structural Legacies of State Socialism," China Journal 90, no. 1 (2023): 1-26.

17 Andrew G. Walder，“中国的极端不平等：国家社会主义的结构性遗产”，《中国期刊》90，第1期（2023年）：1-26。

18 Murray Scot Tanner, "China Rethinks Unrest," Washington Quarterly 27, no. 3 (2004): 137-56.

18 Murray Scot Tanner，“中国重新思考动荡”，《华盛顿季刊》27，第3期（2004年）：137-56。

19 Liu Neng, “当代中国的群体性事件” [Mass incidents in contemporary China], 江苏行政学院学报 [Journal of Jiangsu Administration Institute], no. 56 (2011): 54-55.

19 Liu Neng, “当代中国的群体性事件” [Mass incidents in contemporary China], 江苏行政学院学报 [Journal of Jiangsu Administration Institute], no. 56 (2011): 54-55.

20 Xi Chen, Social Protest and Contentious Authoritarianism in China (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2012), 38; Feng Chen, "Subsistence Crises, Managerial Corruption and Labour Protests in China," China Journal, no. 44 (2000): 41-63.

20 席晨，《中国的社会抗议与争议性威权主义》（纽约：剑桥大学出版社，2012 年），第 38 页；冯晨，“中国的生存危机、管理腐败和劳工抗议”，《中国期刊》，第 44 期（2000 年）：第 41-63 页。

21 Yanqi Tong and Shaohua Lei, Social Protest in Contemporary China, 2003-2010: Transitional Pains and Regime Legitimacy (London: Routledge, 2013), 50.

21 Yanqi Tong 和 Shaohua Lei，《当代中国的社会抗议，2003-2010：转型之痛与政权合法性》（伦敦：Routledge，2013 年），第 50 页。

22 Christian Goebel and Lynette Ong, "Social Unrest in China," Europe China Research and Academic Network (ECRAN), 2012.

22 Christian Goebel 和 Lynette Ong，“中国的社会动荡”，欧洲中国研究和学术网络（ECRAN），2012 年。

23 Ji Li, "Suing the Leviathan: An Empirical Analysis of the Changing Rate of Administrative Litigation in China," Journal of Empirical Legal Studies 10, no. 4 (2013): 815-46.

23 季莉，“起诉利维坦：中国行政诉讼率变化的实证分析”，《实证法律研究》10，第4期（2013）：815-46。

24 Kevin O'Brien and Lianjiang Li, Rightful Resistance in Rural China (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2006).

24 Kevin O'Brien 和 Lianjiang Li，《中国农村的正当抵抗》（纽约：剑桥大学出版社，2006 年）。

25 Goebel and Ong, "Social Unrest in China"; Tong and Lei, Social Protest in Contemporary China, 2003-2010.

25 Goebel 和 Ong，《中国的社会动荡》；Tong 和 Lei，《当代中国的社会抗议，2003-2010》。

26 Yongshun Cai, Collective Resistance in China: Why Popular Protests Succeed or Fail (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2020).

26 蔡永顺，《中国的集体抵抗：民众抗议成功或失败的原因》（斯坦福，加州：斯坦福大学出版社，2020 年）。

27 “中共中央关于进一步加强和改进公安工作的决定” [Decision of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China on further strengthening and improving public security work], 中国改革信息库 [Reformdata.org], November 18, 2003, http://www.reformdata.org/2003/1118/4921.shtml.

27 “中共中央关于进一步加强和改进公安工作的决定” [Decision of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China on further strengthening and improving public security work], 中国改革信息库 [Reformdata.org], November 18, 2003, http://www.reformdata.org/2003/1118/4921.shtml.

28 ZGTJNJ 2003, 292; ZGTJNJ 2005, 2008, 2013, e-book.

28 中国泰民报 2003, 292; ZGTJNJ 2005、2008、2013，电子书。

29 ““金盾工程”一期建设基本完成利用信息破案占两成”[The first phase of the “Golden Shield Project” is basically completed, and 20 percent of the cases have been solved using information], 中国政府门户网站 [Central People's Government], November 30, 2005, https://www.gov.cn/gzdt/2005-11/30/content_113209.htm; Ministry of Public Security, 建国以来公安工作大事要览 [An overview of major events in public security work since the founding of the People's Republic] (Beijing: Qunzhong chubanshe, 2003), 1227.

29 ““金盾工程”一期建设基本完成利用信息破案占两成”[The first phase of the “Golden Shield Project” is basically completed, and 20 percent of the cases have been solved using information], 中国政府门户网站 [Central People's Government], November 30, 2005, https://www.gov.cn/gzdt/2005-11/30/content_113209.htm; Ministry of Public Security, 建国以来公安工作大事要览 [An overview of major events in public security work since the founding of the People's Republic] (Beijing: Qunzhong chubanshe, 2003), 1227.

30 Rogier Greemers, "Cyber China: Upgrading Propaganda, Public Opinion Work and Social Management for the Twenty-First Century," Journal of Contemporary China 26, no. 103 (2017): 85-100; Wen-Hsuan Tsai, "How 'Networked Authoritarianism' Was Operationalized in China," Journal of Contemporary China 25, no. 101 (2016): 731-44.

30 Rogier Greemers，“网络中国：二十一世纪的宣传、舆论工作和社会管理升级”，《当代中国》26，第103期（2017年）：85-100；蔡文轩，“‘网络威权主义’在中国是如何运作的”，《当代中国》25，第101期（2016年）：731-44。

31 Margaret E. Roberts, Censored: Distraction and Diversion Inside China's Great Firewall (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2018); Gary King et al., "How the Chinese Government Fabricates Social Media Posts for Strategic Distraction, Not Engaged Argument," American Political Science Review 111, no. 3 (2017): 484-501.

31 Margaret E. Roberts，《审查：中国防火墙内的干扰和转移》（新泽西州普林斯顿：普林斯顿大学出版社，2018 年）；Gary King 等人，“中国政府如何捏造社交媒体帖子以进行战略性干扰，而不是进行参与性辩论”，《美国政治科学评论》111，第 3 期（2017 年）：484-501。

32 Rebecca MacKinnon, "Liberation Technology: China's 'Networked Authoritarianism,' Journal of Democracy 22, no. 2 (2011): 32-46; "Clinton's Words on China," New York Times, March 9, 2000, https://www.nytimes.com/2000/03/09/world/clinton-s-words-on-china-trade-is-the-smart-thing.html.

32 Rebecca MacKinnon，“解放技术：中国的‘网络威权主义’”，《民主杂志》22，第 2 期（2011 年）：32-46；“克林顿对中国的言论”，《纽约时报》，2000 年 3 月 9 日，https://www.nytimes.com/2000/03/09/world/clinton-s-words-on-china-trade-is-the-smart-thing.html。

33 Ministry of Public Security, "关于开展城市报警与监控技术系统建设的意见" [Opinions on carrying out the construction of urban alarm and monitoring systems], August 25, 2005, http://www.e-gov.org.cn/article-82800.html. The full document referenced here is not publicly available.

33 Ministry of Public Security, "关于开展城市报警与监控技术系统建设的意见" [Opinions on carrying out the construction of urban alarm and monitoring systems], August 25, 2005, http://www.e-gov.org.cn/article-82800.html. The full document referenced here is not publicly available.

34 Ministry of Public Security, “关于印发《关于深入开展城市报警与监控系统应用工作的意见》的通知 公科信 (2010) 30 号” [Notice on issuance of the “Opinions on in-depth development of the application of urban alarm and monitoring systems (2010) no. 30]; Huang Hai-jun, “新平安城市建设需要什么?” [What is needed to build a new safe city?], 中国安防 [China Security], no. 3 (2013): 71-74.

34 Ministry of Public Security, “关于印发《关于深入开展城市报警与监控系统应用工作的意见》的通知 公科信 (2010) 30 号” [Notice on issuance of the “Opinions on in-depth development of the application of urban alarm and monitoring systems (2010) no. 30]; Huang Hai-jun, “新平安城市建设需要什么?” [What is needed to build a new safe city?], 中国安防 [China Security], no. 3 (2013): 71-74.

35 “维稳办走上前台” [The Stability Maintenance Office comes to the front], 双周 [Biweekly], no. 8 (2009): 44-46.

35 “维稳办走上前台” [The Stability Maintenance Office comes to the front], 双周 [Biweekly], no. 8 (2009): 44-46.

36 Seymour Martin Lipset, "Some Social Requisites of Democracy: Economic Development and Political Legitimacy," American Political Science Review 53, no. 1 (1959): 69-105; Michael Ross, "Does Oil Hinder Democracy?", World Politics 53, no. 3 (2001): 325-61.

36 Seymour Martin Lipset，“民主的一些社会要求：经济发展和政治合法性”，《美国政治科学评论》53，第 1 期（1959 年）：69-105；Michael Ross，“石油会阻碍民主吗？”，《世界政治》53，第 3 期（2001 年）：325-61。

37 Samuel Huntington, The Third Wave: Democratization in the Late Twentieth Century (Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1993); Guillermo O'Donnell and Philippe Schmitter, Transitions from Authoritarian Rule: Tentative Conclusions About Uncertain Democracies (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1986).

37 塞缪尔·亨廷顿，《第三波：二十世纪后期的民主化》（诺曼：俄克拉荷马大学出版社，1993 年）；吉列尔莫·奥唐奈和菲利普·施密特，《从威权统治过渡：关于不确定民主的初步结论》（巴尔的摩，马里兰州：约翰·霍普金斯大学出版社，1986 年）。

38 Biao Teng, "The Rights Defense Movement in China," Chinese Law & Government 46, no. 5-6 (2013): 4-12.

38 滕彪，《中国人权捍卫运动》，《中国法律与政府》46，第5-6期（2013年）：4-12。

39 Eva Pils, China's Human Rights Lawyers: Advocacy and Resistance (London: Routledge, 2014); Hualing Fu and Richard Cullen, "Weiquan (Rights Protection) Lawyering in an Authoritarian State: Building a Culture of Public-Interest Lawyering," China Journal, no. 59 (2008): 111-27.

39 Eva Pils，《中国的人权律师：倡导与抵抗》（伦敦：Routledge，2014 年）；傅华玲和 Richard Cullen，“威权国家的维权律师：构建公益律师文化”，《中国期刊》，第 59 期（2008 年）：111-27。

40 Teng Biao, “中国维权运动的起起落落|观点” [The rise and fall of the rights protection movement], 自由亚洲电台 [Radio Free Asia], April 22, 2019, https://www.rfa.org/mandarin/duomeiti/gaussian/gd-0422201911314.html.

40 Teng Biao, “中国维权运动的起起落落|观点” [The rise and fall of the rights protection movement], 自由亚洲电台 [Radio Free Asia], April 22, 2019, https://www.rfa.org/mandarin/duomeiti/gaussian/gd-0422201911314.html.

41 Zheng Enchong, “郑恩宠: 人权律师已成中共的政敌” [Human rights lawyers have become political opponents of the CCP], Duli Zhongwen bihui [Independent Chinese PEN Center], July 26, 2015, https://www.chinesepen.org/blog/archives/31846.

41 Zheng Enchong, “郑恩宠: 人权律师已成中共的政敌” [Human rights lawyers have become political opponents of the CCP], Duli Zhongwen bihui [Independent Chinese PEN Center], July 26, 2015, https://www.chinesepen.org/blog/archives/31846.

42 Teng Biao, “中国维权运动的历史和现状” [The history and current situation of China's human rights movement], 膝彪独立博客 [Teng Biao's independent blog], August 30, 2020, https://tengbiao.wordpress.com/2020/08/30/中国维权运动的历史和现状/.

42 Teng Biao, “中国维权运动的历史和现状” [The history and current situation of China's human rights movement], 膝彪独立博客 [Teng Biao's independent blog], August 30, 2020, https://tengbiao.wordpress.com/2020/08/30/中国维权运动的历史和现状/.

43 “CNNIC统计报告：中国网民数量半年激增1330万”[CNNIC statistical report: The number of Chinese internet users surged by 13.3 million in half a year], 中国新闻网 [China News Network], January 16, 2003, http://www.chinanews.com.cn/n/2003-01-16/26/264408.html; Zhang Xinxin, “我国网民规模达到5.64亿” [The number of internet users in China reaches 564 million],人民网 [People's daily online], January 15, 2013, http://finance.people.com.cn/n/2013/0115/c1004-20210588.html.

43 “CNNIC统计报告：中国网民数量半年激增1330万”[CNNIC statistical report: The number of Chinese internet users surged by 13.3 million in half a year], 中国新闻网 [China News Network], January 16, 2003, http://www.chinanews.com.cn/n/2003-01-16/26/264408.html; Zhang Xinxin, “我国网民规模达到5.64亿” [The number of internet users in China reaches 564 million],人民网 [People's daily online], January 15, 2013, http://finance.people.com.cn/n/2013/0115/c1004-20210588.html.

44 Miao Ning et al., "Estimation of Incidence of Viral Hepatitis B and Analysis on Case Characteristics in China, 2013-2020," Chinese Journal of Epidemiology 42, no. 9 (2021): 1527-31.

44 苗宁等，“2013-2020年中国乙型病毒性肝炎发病率估计及病例特征分析”，《中国流行病学杂志》42，第9期（2021）：1527-31。

45 “乙肝歧视第一案”[First case of hepatitis-B discrimination], 北京青年报 [Beijing Youth Daily], December 20, 2003, https://news.sohu.com/2003/12/20/67/news217166762.shtml; “乙肝歧视第一案波澜再起 芜湖市人事局提出上诉”[The first hepatitis-B discrimination case resurfaces, Wuhu City Personnel Bureau files appeal], 中国新闻网 [China News Network], April 18, 2004, http://www.chinanews.com.cn/n/2004-04-18/26/426799.html.

45 “乙肝歧视第一案”[First case of hepatitis-B discrimination], 北京青年报 [Beijing Youth Daily], December 20, 2003, https://news.sohu.com/2003/12/20/67/news217166762.shtml; “乙肝歧视第一案波澜再起 芜湖市人事局提出上诉”[The first hepatitis-B discrimination case resurfaces, Wuhu City Personnel Bureau files appeal], 中国新闻网 [China News Network], April 18, 2004, http://www.chinanews.com.cn/n/2004-04-18/26/426799.html.

46 “2008年曝光的三聚氰胺毒奶事件造成中国超过30万幼儿中毒，至少6名幼儿死亡”[The 2008 melamine-tainted milk incident poisoned more than 300,000 children and at least six children died], BBC News (Chinese), November 24, 2009, https://www.bbc.com/zhongwen/simp/china/2009/11/091124_china_melamine.

46 “2008年曝光的三聚氰胺毒奶事件造成中国超过30万幼儿中毒，至少6名幼儿死亡”[The 2008 melamine-tainted milk incident poisoned more than 300,000 children and at least six children died], BBC News (Chinese), November 24, 2009, https://www.bbc.com/zhongwen/simp/china/2009/11/091124_china_melamine.

47 “质检总局：全国液态奶三聚氰胺专项监督检查结果”[General Administration of Quality Supervision, Inspection, and Quarantine: Results of national special supervision and inspection of melamine in milk], 中央政府门户网站 [Central government portal], September 19, 2018, https://www.gov.cn/jrzg/2008-09/19/content_1099280.htm.

47 “质检总局：全国液态奶三聚氰胺专项监督检查结果”[General Administration of Quality Supervision, Inspection, and Quarantine: Results of national special supervision and inspection of melamine in milk], 中央政府门户网站 [Central government portal], September 19, 2018, https://www.gov.cn/jrzg/2008-09/19/content_1099280.htm.

48 “山西黑砖窑案新进展”[New progress in Shanxi black brick kiln case], 中国新闻网 [China News Network], April 3, 2008, https://www.chinanews.com.cn/sh/news/2008/04-03/1211156.shtm.

48 “山西黑砖窑案新进展”[New progress in Shanxi black brick kiln case], 中国新闻网 [China News Network], April 3, 2008, https://www.chinanews.com.cn/sh/news/2008/04-03/1211156.shtm.

49 “中国艾滋病维权人士田喜被正式起诉” [Chinese AIDS activist Tian Xi is formally charged], DW [Made for minds], July 9, 2010, https://www.dw.com/zh/中国艾滋病维权人士田喜被正式起诉/a-5981223.

49 “中国艾滋病维权人士田喜被正式起诉” [Chinese AIDS activist Tian Xi is formally charged], DW [Made for minds], July 9, 2010, https://www.dw.com/zh/中国艾滋病维权人士田喜被正式起诉/a-5981223.

50 Sophia Woodman, "Law, Translation, and Voice: Transformation of a struggle for Social Justice in a Chinese Village," Critical Asian Studies 43, no. 2 (2011): 185-210.

50 Sophia Woodman，“法律、翻译和声音：中国乡村社会正义斗争的转变”，《批判亚洲研究》43，第 2 期（2011 年）：185-210。

51 “上千油老板陷入涉案金逾50亿的陕北油田案”[Thousands of oil bosses trapped in northern Shaanxi oilfield involving more than 5 billion yuan], 民营经济报 [Private economic news], November 11, 2004, http://finance.sina.com.cn/leadership/jygl/20041111/13401148289.shtml.

51 “上千油老板陷入涉案金逾50亿的陕北油田案”[Thousands of oil bosses trapped in northern Shaanxi oilfield involving more than 5 billion yuan], 民营经济报 [Private economic news], November 11, 2004, http://finance.sina.com.cn/leadership/jygl/20041111/13401148289.shtml.

52 “民营企业家孙大午被从轻发落” [Private entrepreneur Sun Dawu is given a lighter sentence], 中国青年报 [China youth news], October 31, 2003, http://zqb.cyol.com/.

52 “民营企业家孙大午被从轻发落” [Private entrepreneur Sun Dawu is given a lighter sentence], 中国青年报 [China youth news], October 31, 2003, http://zqb.cyol.com/.

53 Xu Zhiyong, “公盟” [Open constitution initiative], Duli Zhongwen bihui [Independent Chinese PEN Center], February 25, 2020, https://www.chinesepen.org/blog/archives/143930.

53 Xu Zhiyong, “公盟” [Open constitution initiative], Duli Zhongwen bihui [Independent Chinese PEN Center], February 25, 2020, https://www.chinesepen.org/blog/archives/143930.

54 Andrew Wedeman, Double Paradox: Rapid Growth and Rising Corruption in China (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2012).

54 Andrew Wedeman，《双重悖论：中国的快速增长和日益严重的腐败》（纽约州伊萨卡：康奈尔大学出版社，2012 年）。

55 Transparency International, "Corruption Perception Index," https://www.transparency.org/en/cpi/2022. Transparency International began to publish its Corruption Perception Index in 1995.

55 透明国际，“腐败感知指数”，https://www.transparency.org/en/cpi/2022。透明国际于 1995 年开始发布其腐败感知指数。

56 Inflation data obtained from ZGTJNJ 2013.

56 通货膨胀数据来自 ZGTJNJ 2013。

57 Andrew Wedeman, "The Dynamics and Trajectory of Corruption in Contemporary China," China Review 22, no. 2 (2022): 21-48.

57 Andrew Wedeman，“当代中国腐败的动态和轨迹”，《中国评论》22，第2期（2022年）：21-48。

58 Andrew G. Walder, "Elite Opportunity in Transitional Economies," American Sociological Review 68, no. 6 (2003): 899-916; Minxin Pei, China's Crony Capitalism: Dynamics of Regime Decay (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2016).

58 Andrew G. Walder，“转型经济体中的精英机会”，《美国社会学评论》68，第 6 期（2003 年）：899-916；裴敏欣，《中国的裙带资本主义：政权衰落的动态》（马萨诸塞州剑桥：哈佛大学出版社，2016 年）。

59 Yuen Yuen Ang, China's Gilded Age: The Paradox of Economic Boom and Vast Corruption (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2020).

59 袁源安，《中国的镀金时代：经济繁荣与巨大腐败的悖论》（纽约：剑桥大学出版社，2020 年）。

60 ZGTJNJ 2003, 469; ZGTJNJ 2013, e-book.

60 中国泰民报 2003, 469; ZGTJNJ 2013，电子书。

61 Jiangnan Zhu, "The Shadow of the Skyscrapers: Real Estate Corruption in China," Journal of Contemporary China 21, no. 74 (2012): 243-60.

61 朱江南，《摩天大楼的阴影：中国的房地产腐败》，当代中国杂志 21，第 74 期（2012 年）：243-60。

62 “近20年17名省交通厅长被查”[Seventeen provincial transportation directors have been investigated in the past 20 years],人民网 [People's daily online], October 17, 2014, http:// politics.people.com.cn/n/2014/1017/c1001-25854895-12.html.

62 “近20年17名省交通厅长被查”[Seventeen provincial transportation directors have been investigated in the past 20 years],人民网 [People's daily online], October 17, 2014, http:// politics.people.com.cn/n/2014/1017/c1001-25854895-12.html.

63 Jia Chunwang, “最高人民检察院工作报告” [Work report of the Supreme People's Procuratorate], 中华人民共和国最高人民检察院 [Supreme People's Procuratorate of the People's Republic], March 10, 2008, https://www.spp.gov.cn/spp/gzbg/201208/t20120820_2495.shtml.

63 Jia Chunwang, “最高人民检察院工作报告” [Work report of the Supreme People's Procuratorate], 中华人民共和国最高人民检察院 [Supreme People's Procuratorate of the People's Republic], March 10, 2008, https://www.spp.gov.cn/spp/gzbg/201208/t20120820_2495.shtml.

64 Lant Pritchett and Daniel Kaufmann, "Civil Liberties, Democracy, and the Performance of Government Projects," Finance and Development, no. 35 (1998): 26-29.

64 Lant Pritchett 和 Daniel Kaufmann，“公民自由、民主和政府项目的绩效”，《金融与发展》，第 35 期（1998 年）：26-29。

65 Fenfei Li and Jinting Deng, "The Limits of the Arbitrariness in Anticorruption by China's Local Party Discipline Inspection Committees," Journal of Contemporary China 25, no. 97 (2016): 75-90.

65 李芬菲、邓金廷，《中国地方党纪检查委员会反腐败任意性的局限性》，《当代中国》25，第97期（2016年）：75-90。

66 Andrew Wedeman, "Anticorruption Campaigns and the Intensification of Corruption in China," Journal of Contemporary China 14, no. 42 (2005): 93-116.

66 Andrew Wedeman，“反腐败运动与中国腐败的加剧”，《当代中国杂志》14，第42期（2005年）：93-116。

67 Wedeman, Double Paradox; Ang, China's Gilded Age.

67 Wedeman，《双重悖论》；Ang，《中国的镀金时代》。

68 Susan Rose-Ackerman and Bonnie Palifka, Corruption and Government: Causes, Consequences, and Reform (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2016); Pranab Bardhan, "Corruption and Development: A Review of Issues," Journal of Economic Literature 35, no. 3 (1997): 1320-46.

68 Susan Rose-Ackerman 和 Bonnie Palifka，《腐败与政府：原因、后果和改革》（纽约：剑桥大学出版社，2016 年）；Pranab Bardhan，“腐败与发展：问题回顾”，《经济文献杂志》35，第 3 期（1997 年）：1320-46。

69 Tony Saich, From Rebel to Ruler: One Hundred Years of the Chinese Communist Party (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2021), 378; Willy Wo-Lap Lam, Chinese Politics in the Era of Xi Jinping (London: Routledge, 2015), 57-58.

69 Tony Saich，《从叛逆者到统治者：中国共产党百年史》（马萨诸塞州剑桥：哈佛大学出版社，2021 年），第 378 页；林和立，《习近平时代的中国政治》（伦敦：劳特利奇出版社，2015 年），第 57-58 页。

70 Cheng Li, "Was the Shanghai Gang Shanghaiéd? The Fall of Chen Liangyu and the Survival of Jiang Zemin's Faction," China Leadership Monitor, no. 20 (2007): 1-17, https://www.hoover.org/sites/default/files/uploads/documents/clm20cl.pdf.

70 程莉，《上海帮被上海化了吗？陈良宇的倒台与江泽民派的生存》，《中国领导力观察》，第20期（2007年）：1-17，https://www.hoover.org/sites/default/files/uploads/documents/clm20cl.pdf。

71 Lam, Chinese Politics in the Era of Xi Jinping, 44-51.

71 林，《习近平时代的中国政治》，44-51。

72 “中国共产主义青年团第十九次全国代表大会在京开幕”[Nineteenth National Congress of the CYL opens in Beijing], June 19, 2023, http://www.news.cn/politics/leaders/2023-06/19/c_1129706114.htm.

72 “中国共产主义青年团第十九次全国代表大会在京开幕”[Nineteenth National Congress of the CYL opens in Beijing], June 19, 2023, http://www.news.cn/politics/leaders/2023-06/19/c_1129706114.htm.

73 Jérôme Doyon, Rejuvenating Communism: The Communist Youth League as a Political Promotion Channel in Post-Mao China (New York: Columbia University Press, 2017).

73 Jérôme Doyon，《复兴共产主义：后毛泽东时代中国共青团的政治宣传渠道》（纽约：哥伦比亚大学出版社，2017 年）。

74 David M. Lampton, Following the Leader: Ruling China, from Deng Xiaoping to Xi Jinping (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2014).

74 David M. Lampton，《追随领袖：从邓小平到习近平的中国统治》（伯克利：加州大学出版社，2014 年）。

75 Alice Miller, "The Politburo Standing Committee Under Hu Jintao," China Leadership Monitor, no. 35 (2011): 1-9, https://www.hoover.org/sites/default/files/uploads/documents/CLM35AM.pdf.

75 Alice Miller，“胡锦涛领导下的政治局常委”，《中国领导力观察》，第35期（2011年）：1-9，https://www.hoover.org/sites/default/files/uploads/documents/CLM35AM.pdf。

76 Ouyang Yanqin and Luo Jieqi, “令计划被查仕途逆转早有时”[If Ling Jihua's plan is investigated, his career will be reversed sooner rather than later],财新 [Caixin], December 23, 2014, https://china.caixin.com/2014-12-23/100766806.html.

76 Ouyang Yanqin and Luo Jieqi, “令计划被查仕途逆转早有时”[If Ling Jihua's plan is investigated, his career will be reversed sooner rather than later],财新 [Caixin], December 23, 2014, https://china.caixin.com/2014-12-23/100766806.html.

77 Zhiyue Bo and Gang Chen, Bo Xilai and the Chongqing Model (Singapore: East Asia Institute, National University of Singapore, 2009).

77 薄志岳、陈刚，《薄熙来与重庆模式》（新加坡：新加坡国立大学东亚研究所，2009 年）。

78 Pin Ho and Wenguang Huang, A Death in the Lucky Holiday Hotel: Murder, Money, and an Epic Power Struggle in China (New York: PublicAffairs, 2013).

78 何品和黄文光，《幸运假日酒店的死亡：谋杀、金钱和中国的一场史诗般的权力斗争》（纽约：PublicAffairs，2013 年）。

79 Chun Han Wong, Party of One: The Rise of Xi Jinping and China's Superpower Future (New York: Avid Reader Press, 2023), 53.

79 Chun Han Wong，《一人之党：习近平的崛起与中国的超级大国未来》（纽约：Avid Reader出版社，2023年），第53页。

80 James Hollyer and Leonard Wantchekon, "Corruption and Ideology in Autocracies," Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 31, no. 3 (2015): 499-533; Milan Svolik, The Politics of Authoritarian Rule (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2012).

80 James Hollyer 和 Leonard Wantchekon，“专制政体中的腐败与意识形态”，《法律、经济与组织杂志》31，第 3 期（2015 年）：499-533；Milan Svolik，《威权统治的政治》（纽约：剑桥大学出版社，2012 年）。

81 Joel Hellman, "Winners Take All: The Politics of Partial Reform in Postcommunist Transitions," World Politics 50, no. 2 (1998): 203-34; Minxin Pei, China's Trapped Transition: The Limits of Developmental Autocracy (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2006).

81 Joel Hellman，“赢家通吃：后共产主义转型中的部分改革政治”，《世界政治》50，第 2 期（1998 年）：203-34；裴敏欣，《中国陷入困境的转型：发展型专制的局限性》（马萨诸塞州剑桥：哈佛大学出版社，2006 年）。

82 Susan Shirk, Overreach: How China Derailed Its Peaceful Rise (New York: Oxford University Press, 2022).

82 苏珊·希尔克，《过度扩张：中国如何破坏其和平崛起》（纽约：牛津大学出版社，2022 年）。





Chapter 5. China's Economic Miracle





第五章 中国的经济奇迹


1 Yasheng Huang, "Debating China's Economic Growth: The Beijing Consensus or The Washington Consensus," Academy of Management Perspectives 24, no. 2 (2010): 31-47; Scott Kennedy, "The Myth of the Beijing Consensus," Journal of Contemporary China 19, no. 65 (2010): 461-77.

1 黄亚生，“辩论中国经济增长：北京共识还是华盛顿共识”，《管理学会视角》24，第2期（2010年）：31-47；斯科特·肯尼迪，“北京共识的神话”，《当代中国杂志》19，第65期（2010年）：461-77。

2 World Bank, "GDP (current US$)—China," https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.CD?locations=CN.

2 世界银行，“GDP（现价美元）—中国”，https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.CD?locations=CN。

3 Alessandro Nicita and Carlos Razo, "The Rise of a Trade Titan," UNCTAD, April 27, 2021, https://unctad.org/news/china-rise-trade-titan.

3 Alessandro Nicita 和 Carlos Razo，“贸易巨头的崛起”，贸发会议，2021 年 4 月 27 日，https://unctad.org/news/china-rise-trade-titan。

4 Dani Rodrik, "What's So Special About China's Exports?," China and World Economy 14, no. 5 (2006): 1-19.

4 Dani Rodrik，“中国出口有何特别之处？”，《中国与世界经济》14，第5期（2006年）：1-19。

5 ZGTJNJ 2013, e-book, https://www.stats.gov.cn/sj/ndsj/.

5 ZGTJNJ 2013，电子书，https://www.stats.gov.cn/sj/ndsj/。

6 ZGTJNJ 2013, e-book.

6 ZGTJNJ 2013，电子书。

7 ZGTJNJ 2013, e-book.

7 ZGTJNJ 2013，电子书。

8 World Bank, "GDP Per Capita, PPP (current international $)—China," https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.PP.CD?locations=CN.

8 世界银行，“人均GDP（按购买力平价计算，当前国际美元）—中国”，https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.PP.CD?locations=CN。

9 World Bank and the Development Research Center of the State Council of the PRC, Four Decades of Poverty Reduction in China: Drivers, Insights for the World, and the Way Ahead (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2022), 6.

9 世界银行和中华人民共和国国务院发展研究中心，《中国四十年减贫：驱动因素、对世界的启示和未来之路》（华盛顿特区：世界银行，2022 年），第 6 页。

10 ZGTJNJ 1995 (Beijing: Zhongguo tongji chubanshe, 1996), 375.

10 ZGTJNJ 1995 (Beijing: Zhongguo tongji chubanshe, 1996), 375.

11 “中共中央关于建立社会主义市场经济体制若干问题的决定（中发199313号）”[Resolution on several questions on the construction of a socialist market economic system (Guofa 1993, no. 13)], 中国共产党第十四届中央委员会第三次全体会议1993年11月14日通过 [Adopted at the Third Plenary Session of the 14th Central Committee of the Communist Party of China on November 14, 1993], https://www.waizi.org.cn/law/3442.html.

11 “中共中央关于建立社会主义市场经济体制若干问题的决定（中发199313号）”[Resolution on several questions on the construction of a socialist market economic system (Guofa 1993, no. 13)], 中国共产党第十四届中央委员会第三次全体会议1993年11月14日通过 [Adopted at the Third Plenary Session of the 14th Central Committee of the Communist Party of China on November 14, 1993], https://www.waizi.org.cn/law/3442.html.

12 Yi Gang, “改革开放三十年来人民币汇率体制的演变” [Evolution of the RMB exchange rate system during the thirty years of reform and opening], 金融四十人论坛 [Finance forty forum], December 1, 2018, http://www.cf40.com/news_detail/678.html.

12 Yi Gang, “改革开放三十年来人民币汇率体制的演变” [Evolution of the RMB exchange rate system during the thirty years of reform and opening], 金融四十人论坛 [Finance forty forum], December 1, 2018, http://www.cf40.com/news_detail/678.html.

13 Shu-Ki Tsang, "Towards Full Convertibility? China's Foreign Exchange Reforms," China Information 9, no. 1 (1994): 1-41.

13 曾淑琪，《走向完全可兑换？中国的外汇改革》，《中国信息》9，第1期（1994年）：1-41。

14 ZGTJNJ 1995, 537, 574.

14 ZGTJNJ 1995, 537, 574。

15 ZGTJNJ 2003 (Beijing: Zhongguo tongji chubanshe, 2004), 287.

15 ZGTJNJ 2003 (Beijing: Zhongguo tongji chubanshe, 2004), 287.

16 Christine P. W. Wong, "Central-Local Relations in an Era of Fiscal Decline: The Paradox of Fiscal Decentralization in Post-Mao China," China Quarterly, no. 128 (1991): 691-715.

16 Christine P. W. Wong，“财政衰退时代的中央与地方关系：后毛泽东时代中国财政分权的悖论”，《中国季刊》，第128期（1991年）：691-715。

17 ZGTJNJ 2003,282-83.

17 ZGTJNJ 2003,282-83。

18 ZGTJNJ 2003,287.

18 ZGTJNJ 2003,287。

19 Le-Yin Zhang, "Chinese Central-Provincial Fiscal Relationships, Budgetary Decline and the Impact of the 1994 Fiscal Reform: An Evaluation," China Quarterly, no. 157 (1999): 115-41; Ran Tao et al., "Land Leasing and Local Public Finance in China's Regional Development: Evidence from Prefecture-level Cities," Urban Studies 47, no. 10 (2010): 2217-36.

19 张乐银，“中国中央与省级财政关系、预算下降与1994年财政改革的影响：一项评估”，《中国季刊》，第157期（1999年）：115-41；陶冉等，“中国区域发展中的土地租赁与地方公共财政：来自地级市的证据”，《城市研究》，第47卷，第10期（2010年）：2217-36。

20 ZGTJNJ 2010 (Beijing: Zhongguo tongji chubanshe, 2011), 307.

20 ZGTJNJ 2010 (Beijing: Zhongguo tongji chubanshe, 2011), 307.

21 Adam Liu, Jean Oi, and Yi Zhang, "China's Local Government Debt: The Grand Bargain," China Journal, no. 87 (2022): 40-71.

21 Adam Liu、Jean Oi 和 Yi Zhang，“中国地方政府债务：大交易”，《中国期刊》，第 87 期（2022 年）：40-71。

22 State Council, “关于金融体制改革的决定（国发199391号）” [Decision on the reform of the financial system (Guofa 1993), no. 91)], 中国改革信息库 [China reform information database], December 25, 1993, http://www.reformdata.org/1993/1225/23288.shtml.

22 State Council, “关于金融体制改革的决定（国发199391号）” [Decision on the reform of the financial system (Guofa 1993), no. 91)], 中国改革信息库 [China reform information database], December 25, 1993, http://www.reformdata.org/1993/1225/23288.shtml.

23 Stephen Bell, The Rise of the People's Bank of China: The Politics of Institutional Change (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2013).

23 Stephen Bell，《中国人民银行的崛起：制度变革的政治》（马萨诸塞州剑桥：哈佛大学出版社，2013 年）。

24 Nicholas Lardy, China's Unfinished Economic Revolution (Washington, DC: Brookings, 1998), 59-127; Wendy Dobson and Anil K. Kashyap, "The Contradiction in China's Gradualist Banking Reforms," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, no. 2 (2006): 103-62.

24 Nicholas Lardy，《中国未完成的经济革命》（华盛顿特区：布鲁金斯学会，1998 年），59-127；Wendy Dobson 和 Anil K. Kashyap，“中国渐进式银行改革中的矛盾”，《布鲁金斯经济活动论文集》，第 2 期（2006 年）：103-162。

25 Ross Garnaut et al., Private Enterprise in China (Canberra: ANU Press, 2012), 54-55.

25 Ross Garnaut 等人，《中国的私营企业》（堪培拉：澳大利亚国立大学出版社，2012 年），54-55。

26 Yunling Chen, Ming Liu, and Jun Su, "Greasing the Wheels of Bank Lending: Evidence from Private Firms in China," Journal of Banking and Finance 37, no. 7 (2013): 2533-45.

26 云玲、刘明、苏军，“润滑银行贷款：来自中国私营企业的证据”，《银行与金融杂志》37，第7期（2013）：2533-45。

27 ZGTJNJ 2013, e-book.

27 ZGTJNJ 2013，电子书。

28 “中共中央关于建立社会主义市场经济体制若干问题的决定”

28 “中共中央关于建立社会主义市场经济体制若干问题的决定”

29 Lardy, China's Unfinished Economic Revolution, 21-58.

29 Lardy，《中国未完成的经济革命》，第 21-58 页。

30 Nicholas R. Lardy, Markets Over Mao: The Rise of Private Business in China (Washington, DC: Peterson Institute for International Economics, 2014), 48-58; Barry Naughton, "The State Asset Commission: A Powerful New Government Body," China Leadership Monitor, no. 8 (2003): 1-10, https://www.hoover.org/sites/default/files/uploads/documents/clm8_bn.pdf.

30 Nicholas R. Lardy，《市场胜于毛泽东：中国私营企业的崛起》（华盛顿特区：彼得森国际经济研究所，2014 年），第 48-58 页；Barry Naughton，“国家资产委员会：一个强大的新政府机构”，《中国领导力观察》，第 8 期（2003 年）：第 1-10 页，https://www.hoover.org/sites/default/files/uploads/documents/clm8_bn.pdf。

31 Lardy, Markets Over Mao, 11-41.

31 拉迪，《毛泽东的市场》，11-41。

32 X. L. Ding, "The Illicit Asset Stripping of Chinese State Firms," China Journal, no. 43 (2000): 1-28.

32 丁晓林，《中国国有企业非法资产剥离》，《中国期刊》，2000 年第 43 期，第 1-28 页。

33 ZGTJNJ 1998 (Beijing: Zhongguo tongji chubanshe, 1999), 431-32; ZGTJNJ 1999, 2000, e-book; ZGTJNJ 2003 (Beijing: Zhongguo tongji chubanshe, 2004), 460.

33 ZGTJNJ 1998 (Beijing: Zhongguo tongji chubanshe, 1999), 431-32; ZGTJNJ 1999, 2000, e-book; ZGTJNJ 2003 (Beijing: Zhongguo tongji chubanshe, 2004), 460.

34 Feng Chen, "Subsistence Crises, Managerial Corruption and Labour Protests in China," China Journal, no. 44 (2000): 41-63; Fulong Wu, "Urban Poverty and Marginalization Under Market Transition: The Case of Chinese Cities," International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 28, no. 2 (2004): 401-23.

34 冯晨，“中国的生存危机、管理腐败和劳工抗议”，《中国期刊》，第44期（2000年）：41-63；吴福龙，“市场转型下的城市贫困和边缘化：以中国城市为例”，《国际城市与区域研究杂志》，第28卷，第2期（2004年）：401-23。

35 Feng Chen "Industrial Restructuring and Workers' Resistance in China," Modern China 29, no. 2 (2003): 237-62.

35 冯晨，《中国产业结构调整与工人抵抗》，《现代中国》29，第2期（2003年）：237-62。

36 Kenneth Rogoff and Yuanchen Yang, "Peak China Housing," National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper no. 27697 (2020).

36 Kenneth Rogoff 和 Yuanchen Yang，“中国住房峰值”，美国国家经济研究局工作论文第 27697 号（2020 年）。

37 Chong-En Bai, Jiangyong Lu, and Zhigang Tao, "How Does Privatization Work in China?," Journal of Comparative Economics 37, no. 3 (2009): 453-70; Jean Oi, "Patterns of Corporate Restructuring in China: Political Constraints on Privatization," China Journal, no. 53 (2005): 115-36.

37 白崇恩、卢江勇、陶志刚，《中国的私有化是如何运作的？》，《比较经济学杂志》37，第3期（2009年）：453-70；Jean Oi，《中国企业重组模式：私有化的政治约束》，《中国期刊》53期（2005年）：115-36。

38 He Li, "Debating China's Economic Reform: New Leftists vs. Liberals," Journal of Chinese Political Science, no. 15 (2010): 1-23.

38 何莉，《辩论中国经济改革：新左派对自由派》，《中国政治学杂志》，2010 年第 15 期，第 1-23 页。

39 Cheryl Long, Jing Zhang, and Jin Yang, "Uncovering Asset Stripping During China's Privatization," Economics of Transition and Institutional Change 29, no. 4 (2021): 652.

39 Cheryl Long、Jing Zhang 和 Jin Yang，“揭露中国私有化过程中的资产剥离”，转型与制度变迁经济学 29，第 4 期（2021 年）：652。

40 Hongbin Li and Scott Rozelle, "Saving or Stripping Rural Industry: An Analysis of Privatization and Efficiency in China," Agricultural Economics 23, no. 3 (2000): 251.

40 李宏斌和斯科特·罗泽尔，《拯救还是剥离农村产业：中国私有化与效率分析》，农业经济学23，第3期（2000年）：251。

41 Hongyi Chen, The Institutional Transition of China's Township and Village Enterprises: Market Liberalization, Contractual Form Innovation and Privatization (Brookfield, VT: Ashgate, 2000).

41. 陈宏义，《中国乡镇和乡村企业的制度转型：市场自由化、合同形式创新和私有化》（佛蒙特州布鲁克菲尔德：阿什盖特出版社，2000 年）。

42 ZGTJNJ 2003, 134.

42 OGTJNJ 2003, 134。

43 ZGTJNJ 1995, 375; ZGTJNJ 2013, e-book.

43 中关村科技杂志 1995, 375; ZGTJNJ 2013，电子书。

44 ZGTJNJ 1995, 375; calculated from the data in tables 14-1 and 14-6. ZGTJNJ 2012, e-book, https://www.stats.gov.cn/sj/ndsj/.

44 ZGTJNJ 1995, 375; 根据表 14-1 和 14-6 中的数据计算得出。ZGTJNJ 2012，电子书，https://www.stats.gov.cn/sj/ndsj/。

45 ZGTJNJ 1995, 554.

45 ZGTJNJ 1995, 554。

46 Richard Hu and Weijie Chen, Global Shanghai Remade: The Rise of Pudong New Area (London: Routledge, 2020).

46 Richard Hu 和 Weijie Chen，《全球上海重塑：浦东新区的崛起》（伦敦：Routledge，2020 年）。

47 Guangdong Provincial Planning Commission, “省计委关于下放外商直接投资项目审批权限意见的通知（199236号）” [Notice on the decentralization of approval authority for foreign direct investment projects (1992) no. 36], 广东省人民政府 [Guangdong Province People's Government], May 16, 1992, http://www.gd.gov.cn/zwgk/gongbao/1992/5/content/post_3356383.html.

47 Guangdong Provincial Planning Commission, “省计委关于下放外商直接投资项目审批权限意见的通知（199236号）” [Notice on the decentralization of approval authority for foreign direct investment projects (1992) no. 36], 广东省人民政府 [Guangdong Province People's Government], May 16, 1992, http://www.gd.gov.cn/zwgk/gongbao/1992/5/content/post_3356383.html.

48 “指导外商投资方向暂行规定”[Interim regulations to guide the direction of foreign investment], June 20, 1995, 法律法规库 [Laws and regulations library], https://www.flfgk.com/detail/961475ca38c91a2de22a3bdf277d2db1.html.

48 “指导外商投资方向暂行规定”[Interim regulations to guide the direction of foreign investment], June 20, 1995, 法律法规库 [Laws and regulations library], https://www.flfgk.com/detail/961475ca38c91a2de22a3bdf277d2db1.html.

49 Chunlai Chen, "The Liberalisation of FDI Policies and the Impacts of FDI on China's Economic Development," in China's 40 Years of Reform and Development 1978-2018, ed. Ross Garnaut, Ligang Song, and Cai Fang (Canberra: ANU Press, 2018), 598.

49 陈春来，《外国直接投资政策自由化及其对中国经济发展的影响》，载于《中国改革与发展的40年（1978-2018）》，罗斯·加诺特、宋立刚、方彩编（堪培拉：澳大利亚国立大学出版社，2018年），第598页。

50 Nicholas R. Lardy, China in the World Economy (Washington, DC: Institute for International Economics, 1994), 63-71.

50 Nicholas R. Lardy，《中国在世界经济中的地位》（华盛顿特区：国际经济研究所，1994 年），第 63-71 页。

51 Calculated from ZGTJNJ 1995, 114.

51 根据 ZGTJNJ 1995, 114 计算得出。

52 Yi Huang, Liugang Sheng, Gewei Wang, "How Did Rising Labor Costs Erode China's Global Advantage?", Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, no. 183 (2021): 632-53.

52 黄毅、盛柳刚、王革伟，“劳动力成本上升如何削弱中国的全球优势？”，《经济行为与组织杂志》，第183期（2021年）：632-53。

53 Min Ye, Diasporas and Foreign Direct Investment in China and India (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2014).

53 叶敏，《中国和印度的侨民与外国直接投资》（纽约：剑桥大学出版社，2014 年）。

54 Calculated from data in ZGTJNJ 1998 (Beijing: Zhongguo tongji chubanshe, 1999), 639; ZGTJNJ 1999, 2000, 2001, e-book, https://www.stats.gov.cn/sj/ndsj/; ZGTJNJ 2003, 672; ZGTJNJ 2005, 2007, e-book, https://www.stats.gov.cn/sj/ndsj/.

54 根据ZGTJNJ 1998的数据计算（北京：中国同济出版社，1999），639； ZGTJNJ 1999、2000、2001，电子书，https://www.stats.gov.cn/sj/ndsj/；中国医科杂志, 2003, 672; ZGTJNJ 2005、2007，电子书，https://www.stats.gov.cn/sj/ndsj/。

55 Geng Xiao, "People's Republic of China's Round-Tripping FDI: Scale, Causes and Implications," ADB Institute Discussion Paper, no. 7 (July 2004), https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication/156758/adbi-dp7.pdf.

55 耿晓，《中华人民共和国的循环式外国直接投资：规模、原因和影响》，亚洲开发银行研究所讨论稿，第 7 号（2004 年 7 月），https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication/156758/adbi-dp7.pdf。

56 Yasheng Huang, Selling China: Foreign Direct Investment During the Reform Era (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2003).

56 黄亚生，《推销中国：改革时代的外国直接投资》（纽约：剑桥大学出版社，2003 年）。

57 ZGTJNJ 1998, 142; ZGTJNJ 2013, e-book.

57 中关村民政杂志 1998, 142; ZGTJNJ 2013，电子书。

58 Ziliang Deng, Foreign Direct Investment in China: Spillover Effects on Domestic Enterprises (London: Routledge, 2012); Cheryl Xiaoning Long and Galina Hale, Foreign Direct Investment in China: Winners and Losers (Singapore: World Scientific, 2012), 49-67.

58 邓子良，《中国外国直接投资：对国内企业的溢出效应》（伦敦：Routledge出版社，2012年）；Cheryl Xiaoning Long和Galina Hale，《中国外国直接投资：赢家和输家》（新加坡：World Scientific出版社，2012年），第49-67页。

59 ZGTJNJ 1995, 552-553; ZGTJNJ 2013, e-book.

59 中关村科技杂志 1995, 552-553; ZGTJNJ 2013，电子书。

60 Robert Koopman, Zhi Wang, and Shang-Jin Wei, "How Much of Chinese Exports Is Really Made in China? Assessing Domestic Value-Added When Processing Trade Is Pervasive," National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 14109, (2008); Bawoo Kim, "What Has China Learned from Processing Trade?," Journal of Economic Structures 6, no. 1 (2017): 11; Chen, "The Liberalisation of FDI Policies," 607.

60 Robert Koopman、Zhi Wang 和 Shang-Jin Wei，“中国出口产品中有多少是真正在中国制造的？加工贸易普遍存在时评估国内增加值”，美国国家经济研究局工作论文 14109，（2008 年）；Bawoo Kim，“中国从加工贸易中学到了什么？”，《经济结构杂志》6，第 1 期（2017 年）：11；Chen，“外国直接投资政策的自由化”，607。

61 State Council, 国务院关于进一步深化对外贸易体制改革的决定, 国发 (1994) 4号 [Decision on further deepening the reform of the foreign trade system, Guofa (1994) no. 4], 人民政府 [Central Government of the People's Republic of China], January 11, 1994, https://www.gov.cn/zhengce/content/2010-11/15/content_1429.htm.

61 State Council, 国务院关于进一步深化对外贸易体制改革的决定, 国发 (1994) 4号 [Decision on further deepening the reform of the foreign trade system, Guofa (1994) no. 4], 人民政府 [Central Government of the People's Republic of China], January 11, 1994, https://www.gov.cn/zhengce/content/2010-11/15/content_1429.htm.

62 Nicholas Lardy, "Is China a Closed Economy?," Brookings Institution, February 24, 2000, https://www.brookings.edu/articles/is-china-a-closed-economy/.

62 Nicholas Lardy，“中国是封闭经济体吗？”，布鲁金斯学会，2000 年 2 月 24 日，https://www.brookings.edu/articles/is-china-a-closed-economy/。

63 Sheng Bin and Wei Fang, “新中国对外贸易发展70年” [Seventy years of foreign trade development in new China], 财贸经济 [Finance and trade economics] 40, no.10 (2019): 38, http://cmjj.ajcass.org/UploadFile/Issue/dqwwyicc.pdf.

63 Sheng Bin and Wei Fang, “新中国对外贸易发展70年” [Seventy years of foreign trade development in new China], 财贸经济 [Finance and trade economics] 40, no.10 (2019): 38, http://cmjj.ajcass.org/UploadFile/Issue/dqwwyicc.pdf.

64 “2012年中国对外贸易发展情况” (Development of China's foreign trade in 2012), 中华人民共和国商务部 [PRC Ministry of Commerce], April 28, 2013, http://zhs.mofcom.gov.cn/article/Nocategory/201304/20130400107790.shtml.

64 “2012年中国对外贸易发展情况” (Development of China's foreign trade in 2012), 中华人民共和国商务部 [PRC Ministry of Commerce], April 28, 2013, http://zhs.mofcom.gov.cn/article/Nocategory/201304/20130400107790.shtml.

65 Xiang Bo, ed., "Private Firms Lead China's Imports, Exports for First Time," Xinhua, January 14, 2020, http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/2020-01/14/c_138704308.htm.

65 项波主编，《民营企业首次引领中国进出口》，新华社，2020年1月14日，http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/2020-01/14/c_138704308.htm。

66 Congressional Research Service, "China's Currency Policy: An Analysis of the Economic Issues," July 22, 2013, https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/RS/RS21625/70#.

66 美国国会研究服务处，《中国的货币政策：经济问题分析》，2013 年 7 月 22 日，https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/RS/RS21625/70#。

67 Carlos Razo, "Evolution of the World's 25 Top Trading Nations," UNCTAD, April 6, 2021, https://unctad.org/topic/trade-analysis/graph-10-may-2021.

67 Carlos Razo，“世界 25 个主要贸易国的演变”，联合国贸发会议，2021 年 4 月 6 日，https://unctad.org/topic/trade-analysis/graph-10-may-2021。

68 Hui Feng, The Politics of China's Accession to the World Trade Organization (London: Routledge, 2006); Nicholas Lardy, Integrating China into the Global Economy (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press, 2001).

68 惠峰，《中国加入世界贸易组织的政治》（伦敦：Routledge出版社，2006年）；尼古拉斯·拉迪，《将中国融入全球经济》（华盛顿特区：布鲁金斯学会出版社，2001年）。

69 Robert Lighthizer, No Trade Is Free: Changing Course, Taking on China, and Helping America's Workers (New York: Broadside Books, 2023); John Mearsheimer, "The Inevitable Rivalry: America, China, and the Tragedy of Great-Power Politics," Foreign Affairs 100, no. 6 (November–December 2021): 48–58.

69 Robert Lighthizer，《没有免费的贸易：改变路线、对抗中国、帮助美国工人》（纽约：Broadside Books，2023 年）；John Mearsheimer，“不可避免的竞争：美国、中国和大国政治的悲剧”，《外交事务》100，第 6 期（2021 年 11 月至 12 月）：48-58。

70 Henry Gao, Damian Raess, and Ka Zeng, eds., China and the WTO: A Twenty-Year Assessment (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2023).

70 Henry Gao、Damian Raess 和 Ka Zeng 编，《中国与世贸组织：二十年评估》（纽约：剑桥大学出版社，2023 年）。

71 ZGTJNJ 2012, e-book.

71 ZGTJNJ 2012，电子书。

72 ZGTJNJ 2012, e-book.

72 ZGTJNJ 2012，电子书。

73 Loren Brandt et al., "WTO Accession and Performance of Chinese Manufacturing Firms," American Economic Review 107, no. 9 (2017): 2784-20; Zhiming Zhang, Xin Zhang, and Riming Cui, "Research on the Effects of WTO Accession on China's Economic Growth: Path Analysis and Empirical Study," Journal of Chinese Economic and Foreign Trade Studies 6, no. 2 (2013): 70-84.

73 Loren Brandt 等人，“加入世贸组织与中国制造业企业的绩效”，《美国经济评论》107，第 9 期（2017 年）：2784-20；张志明、张鑫、崔日明，“加入世贸组织对中国经济增长的影响研究：路径分析与实证研究”，《中国经济对外贸易研究》6，第 2 期（2013 年）：70-84。

74 Bilge Erten and Jessica Leight, "Exporting Out of Agriculture: The Impact of WTO Access on Structural Transformation in China," Review of Economics and Statistics 103, no. 2 (2021): 364-80.

74 Bilge Erten 和 Jessica Leight，“出口农业：加入世贸组织对中国结构转型的影响”，《经济与统计评论》103，第 2 期（2021 年）：364-80。

75 Steve Ching et al., "Economic Benefits of Globalization: The Impact of Entry to the WTO on China's Growth," Pacific Economic Review 16, no. 3 (2011): 285-301; Chinese GDP growth data are obtained from ZGTJNJ 2008 (Beijing: Zhongguo tongji chubanshe, 2009), 40.

75 Steve Ching 等人，“全球化的经济效益：加入世贸组织对中国增长的影响”，《太平洋经济评论》16，第 3 期（2011 年）：285-301；中国 GDP 增长数据来自《2008 年中国经济与发展报告》（北京：中国通报出版社，2009 年），第 40 页。

76 Yeling Tan, "How the WTO Changed China: The Mixed Legacy of Economic Engagement," Foreign Affairs 100, no. 2 (2021): 90-102.

76 谭叶玲，《世贸组织如何改变了中国：经济参与的喜忧参半的遗产》，《外交事务》100，第2期（2021年）：90-102。

77 Congressional Research Service, "China-U.S. Trade Issues Updated," July 30, 2018, 50-53.

77 美国国会研究服务处，《中美贸易问题最新进展》，2018 年 7 月 30 日，第 50-53 页。

78 David Autor et al., "Importing Political Polarization? The Electoral Consequences of Rising Trade Exposure," American Economic Review 110, no. 10 (2020): 3139-83.

78 David Autor 等人，“进口政治极化？贸易风险增加的选举后果”，《美国经济评论》110，第 10 期（2020 年）：3139-83。

79 David Bloom and Jeffrey Williamson, "Demographic Transitions and Economic Miracles in Emerging Asia," World Bank Economic Review 12, no. 3 (1998): 419-55; Andrew Mason and Tomoko Kinugasa, "East Asian Economic Development: Two Demographic Dividends," Journal of Asian Economics 19, no. 5-6 (2008): 389-99.

79 David Bloom 和 Jeffrey Williamson，“新兴亚洲的人口转型和经济奇迹”，世界银行经济评论 12，第 3 期（1998 年）：419-55；Andrew Mason 和 Tomoko Kinugasa，“东亚经济发展：两种人口红利”，亚洲经济学杂志 19，第 5-6 期（2008 年）：389-99。

80 Cai Fang, Ross Garnaut, and Ligang Song, "How Reform Captured China's Demographic Dividend," in Garnaut et al., China's 40 Years of Reform and Development: 1978-2018, 8-10.

80 蔡芳、罗斯·加诺特、宋立刚，《改革如何攫取中国的人口红利》，载加诺特等编，《中国40年的改革与发展：1978-2018》，第8-10页。

81 Mason and Kinugasa, "East Asian Economic Development."

81 Mason 和 Kinugasa，“东亚经济发展”。

82 ZGTJNJ 1990 (Beijing: Zhongguo tongji chubanshe, 1991), 90.

82 ZGTJNJ 1990 (Beijing: Zhongguo tongji chubanshe, 1991), 90.

83 ZGTJNJ 1995,61.

83 ZGTJNJ 1995,61。

84 Fang Cai and Dewen Wang, "China's Demographic Transition: Implications for Growth," in The China Boom and Its Discontents, ed. Ross Garnaut and Ligang Song (Canberra: Asia Pacific Press, 2005), 34-52; Haifeng Zhang, Hongliang Zhang, and Junsen Zhang, "Demographic Age Structure and Economic Development: Evidence from Chinese Provinces," Journal of Comparative Economics 43, no. 1 (2015): 170-85.

84 方才和王德文，《中国的人口转型：对增长的影响》，载于《中国繁荣及其不满》，罗斯·加诺特和宋立刚编（堪培拉：亚太出版社，2005 年），第 34-52 页；张海峰、张洪亮和张俊森，《人口年龄结构与经济发展：来自中国各省的证据》，《比较经济学杂志》43，第 1 期（2015 年）：170-85。

85 National Bureau of Statistics, 2013 年全国农民工监测调查报告 [2013 National migrant workers monitoring survey report], 中央政府门户网站 [Central government portal], May 12, 2014, https://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2014-05/12/content_2677889.htm.

85 National Bureau of Statistics, 2013 年全国农民工监测调查报告 [2013 National migrant workers monitoring survey report], 中央政府门户网站 [Central government portal], May 12, 2014, https://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2014-05/12/content_2677889.htm.

86 Xiaodong Zhu, "Understanding China's Growth: Past, Present, and Future," Journal of Economic Perspectives 26, no. 4 (2012): 103-24.

86 朱晓东，《理解中国的增长：过去、现在和未来》，《经济展望杂志》26，第4期（2012年）：103-24。

87 Fang Cai, "How Has the Chinese Economy Capitalised on the Demographic Dividend During the Reform Period?" in Garnaut et al., China's 40 Years of Reform and Development: 1978-2018, 235-55; Fang, Garnaut, and Song, "How Reform Captured China's Demographic Dividend," 8-10.

87 方才，“中国经济在改革时期如何利用人口红利？”载于 Garnaut 等人，《中国改革与发展的 40 年：1978-2018》，第 235-255 页；方才、Garnaut 和宋，“改革如何获取中国的人口红利”，第 8-10 页。

88 Fang Cai, "Haste Makes Waste: Policy Options Facing China After Reaching the Lewis Turning Point," China and World Economy 23, no. 1 (2015): 1-20.

88 方才，“欲速则不达：中国在达到刘易斯转折点后面临的政策选择”，《中国与世界经济》23，第1期（2015年）：1-20。

89 ZGTJNJ 2013, e-book.

89 ZGTJNJ 2013，电子书。

90 World Bank, The East Asian Miracle: Economic Growth and Public Policy (New York: Oxford University Press, 1993).

90 世界银行，《东亚奇迹：经济增长与公共政策》（纽约：牛津大学出版社，1993 年）。

91 Alwyn Young, "The Tyranny of Numbers: Confronting the Statistical Realities of the East Asian Growth Experience," Quarterly Journal of Economics 110, no. 3 (1995): 641-80; Paul Krugman, "The Myth of Asia's Miracle," Foreign Affairs 73, no. 6 (1994): 62-78.

91 Alwyn Young，“数字的暴政：直面东亚增长经验的统计现实”，《经济学季刊》110，第3期（1995年）：641-80；Paul Krugman，“亚洲奇迹的神话”，《外交事务》73，第6期（1994年）：62-78。

92 Loren Brandt and Xiaodong Zhu, "Accounting for China's Growth," IZA Discussion Paper, no. 4764 (2010), https://www.iza.org/publications/dp/4764/accounting-for-chinas-growth.

92 Loren Brandt 和 Xiaodong Zhu，“中国增长的核算”，IZA 讨论稿，第 4764 号（2010 年），https://www.iza.org/publications/dp/4764/accounting-for-chinas-growth。

93 Barry Bosworth and Susan Collins, "Accounting for Growth: Comparing China and India," Journal of Economic Perspectives 22, no. 1 (2008): 45-66; Dwight H. Perkins and Thomas G. Rawski, "Forecasting China's Economic Growth to 2025," in China's Great Economic Transformation, ed. Loren Brandt and Thomas Rawski (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2010), 839.

93 Barry Bosworth 和 Susan Collins，“增长核算：比较中国和印度”，《经济展望杂志》22，第 1 期（2008 年）：45-66；Dwight H. Perkins 和 Thomas G. Rawski，“预测中国经济增长到 2025 年”，载于 Loren Brandt 和 Thomas Rawski 编辑的《中国经济大转型》（纽约：剑桥大学出版社，2010 年），839。

94 World Bank, https://databank.worldbank.org/source/world-development-indicators#.

94 世界银行，https://databank.worldbank.org/source/world-development-indicators#。

95 ZGTJNJ 2013, e-book.

95 ZGTJNJ 2013，电子书。

96 Aart Kraay, "Household Saving in China," World Bank Economic Review 14, no. 3 (2000): 545-70.

96 Aart Kraay，“中国的家庭储蓄”，世界银行经济评论，第 14 期，第 1 期。 3（2000）：545-70。

97 Franco Modigliani and Shi Larry Cao, "The Chinese Saving Puzzle and the Life-Cycle Hypothesis," Journal of Economic Literature 42, no. 1 (2004): 145-70.

97 Franco Modigliani 和 Shi Larry Cao，“中国储蓄之谜和生命周期假说”，《经济文献杂志》42，第 1 期（2004 年）：145-70。

98 Marcos Chamon, Kai Liu, and Eswar Prasad, "Income Uncertainty and Household Savings in China," National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 16565, (December 2010).

98 Marcos Chamon、Kai Liu 和 Eswar Prasad，“中国的收入不确定性和家庭储蓄”，美国国家经济研究局工作论文 16565，（2010 年 12 月）。

99 Longmei Zhang et al., "China's High Savings: Drivers, Prospects, and Policies," International Monetary Fund, Working Paper WP18/277, (2018).

99 Longmei Zhang 等人，“中国的高储蓄率：驱动因素、前景和政策”，国际货币基金组织工作论文 WP18/277，（2018 年）。

100 Edward Gleaser et al., "A Real Estate Boom with Chinese Characteristics," Journal of Economic Perspectives 31, no. 1 (2017): 93-116; Zhenya Liu and Shixuan Wang, "Decoding Chinese Stock Market Returns: Three-State Hidden Semi-Markov Model," Pacific-Basin Finance Journal, no. 44 (2017): 127-49.

100 Edward Gleaser 等人，“具有中国特色的房地产繁荣”，《经济展望杂志》31，第 1 期（2017 年）：93-116；刘振亚和王世轩，“解码中国股票市场收益：三状态隐半马尔可夫模型”，《太平洋盆地金融杂志》44 期（2017 年）：127-49。

101 “温家宝：中国具备继续保持经济平稳较快发展的条件”[Wen Jiabao: China has the conditions to continue to maintain stable and rapid economic development], 中央政府门户网站 [Central government portal], March 16, 2007, https://www.gov.cn/wszb/zhibo20070316b/content_552718.htm.

101 “温家宝：中国具备继续保持经济平稳较快发展的条件”[Wen Jiabao: China has the conditions to continue to maintain stable and rapid economic development], 中央政府门户网站 [Central government portal], March 16, 2007, https://www.gov.cn/wszb/zhibo20070316b/content_552718.htm.

102 Wen Jiabao, “2013年国务院政府工作报告” [2013 government work report], 中央政府门户网站 [Central government portal], March 19, 2013, https://www.gov.cn/test/2013-03/19/content_2357136.htm.

102 Wen Jiabao, “2013年国务院政府工作报告” [2013 government work report], 中央政府门户网站 [Central government portal], March 19, 2013, https://www.gov.cn/test/2013-03/19/content_2357136.htm.

103 ZGTJNJ 2021, e-book.

103 ZGTJNJ 2021，电子书。

104 Nicholas Lardy, Sustaining China's Economic Growth After the Global Financial Crisis (Washington, DC: Peterson Institute for International Economics, 2012), 47.

104 Nicholas Lardy，《全球金融危机后中国经济增长的维持》（华盛顿特区：彼得森国际经济研究所，2012 年），第 47 页。

105 ZGTJNJ 2013, e-book.

105 ZGTJNJ 2013，电子书。

106 Tian Zhu, Catching Up to America: Culture, Institutions, and the Rise of China (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2021), 102; Dominik Peschel and Wenyu Liu, “The Long-Term Growth Prospects of the People's Republic of China,” Asian Development Bank Institute, East Asia Working Paper, no. 54 (2022): 27.

106 田朱，《追赶美国：文化、制度与中国的崛起》（纽约：剑桥大学出版社，2021 年），第 102 页；Dominik Peschel 和刘文宇，“中华人民共和国的长期增长前景”，亚洲开发银行研究所，东亚工作论文，第 54 号（2022 年）：第 27 页。

107 Loren Brandt et al., "China's Productivity Slowdown and Future Growth Potential," World Bank, Policy Research Paper no. 9298 (2020): 15-16.

107 Loren Brandt 等人，“中国生产率放缓和未来增长潜力”，世界银行政策研究论文第 9298 号（2020 年）：15-16。

108 Guo-liang Yang, Hirofumi Fukuyama, and Yao-yao Song, "Estimating Capacity Utilization of Chinese Manufacturing Industries," Socio-Economic Planning Sciences, no. 67 (2019): 94-110; Qing Yang et al., "The Drivers of Coal Overcapacity in China: An Empirical Study Based on the Quantitative Decomposition," Resources, Conservation and Recycling, no. 141 (2019): 123-32.

108 杨国良、福山博文、宋瑶瑶，“中国制造业产能利用率估算”，社会经济规划科学，第 67 期（2019 年）：94-110；杨庆等，“中国煤炭产能过剩的驱动因素：基于定量分解的实证研究”，资源、保护与回收，第 141 期（2019 年）：123-32。

109 Brandt et al., "China's Productivity Slowdown," 12-13; Lardy, Markets Over Mao, 34, 97.

109 Brandt 等人，“中国生产率放缓”，12-13；Lardy，《市场胜于毛泽东》，34，97。

110 Shang-Jin Wei, Zhuan Xie, and Xiaobo Zhang, "From 'Made in China' to 'Innovated in China': Necessity, Prospect, and Challenges," Journal of Economic Perspectives 31, no. 1 (2017): 56-57.

110 魏尚进、谢专、张晓波，“从‘中国制造’到‘中国创新’：必要性、前景和挑战”，《经济展望杂志》31，第1期（2017）：56-57。

111 Harry X. Wu, "Sustainability of China's Growth Model: A Productivity Perspective," China and World Economy 24, no. 5 (2016): 51.

111 Harry X. Wu，“中国增长模式的可持续性：生产率视角”，《中国与世界经济》24，第5期（2016年）：51。

112 Xie Wei and Zhang, "From 'Made in China' to 'Innovated in China," 57.

112 谢伟和张，《从“中国制造”到“中国创新”》，57。

113 ZGTJNJ 2008,57,708.

113 ZGTJNJ 2008,57,708。

114 Margot Schüler and Yun Schüler-Zhou, "China's Economic Policy in the Time of the Global Financial Crisis: Which Way Out?", Journal of Current Chinese Affairs 38, no. 3 (2009): 165-81.

114 Margot Schüler 和 Yun Schüler-Zhou，“全球金融危机时期的中国经济政策：出路何在？”，《当代中国事务杂志》38，第 3 期（2009 年）：165-81。

115 Nicholas Borst, "China's Credit Boom: New Risks Require New Reforms," Policy Brief 2013-24 (Washington, DC: Peterson Institute for International Economics, 2013), 5.

115 Nicholas Borst，“中国的信贷繁荣：新的风险需要新的改革”，政策简报 2013-24（华盛顿特区：彼得森国际经济研究所，2013 年），第 5 页。

116 ZGTJNJ 2011, ZGTJNJ 2021, e-book.

116 ZGTJNJ 2011，ZGTJNJ 2021，电子书。

117 ZGTJNJ 2011, e-book.

117 ZGTJNJ 2011，电子书。

118 Lardy, Sustaining China's Economic Growth After the Global Financial Crisis, 5; Yan Liang, "China and the Global Financial Crisis: Assessing the Impacts and Policy Response," China and World Economy 18, no. 3 (2010): 56-72; Shaun Breslin, "Paradigm(s) Shifting? Responding to the Global Financial Crisis," in The Consequences of the Global Financial Crisis The Rhetoric of Reform and Regulation, ed. Wyn Grant and Graham K. Wilson (New York: Oxford University Press, 2012), 226-46.

118 Lardy，《全球金融危机后中国经济增长的持续性》，第5页；梁岩，“中国与全球金融危机：评估其影响和政策应对”，《中国与世界经济》18，第3期（2010年）：56-72；Shaun Breslin，“范式转变？应对全球金融危机”，载于《全球金融危机的后果：改革与监管的修辞》，Wyn Grant和Graham K. Wilson编（纽约：牛津大学出版社，2012年），226-46。

119 Bank of International Settlements, "Credit to the Non-Financial Sector," https://www.bis.org/statistics/totcredit.htm.

119 国际清算银行，“对非金融部门的信贷”，https://www.bis.org/statistics/totcredit.htm。

120 Borst, "China's Credit Boom."

120 Borst，“中国的信贷繁荣”。

121 Sally Chen and Joong Shik Kang, "Credit Booms—Is China Different?", International Monetary Fund, Working Paper 18/2 (2018): 5-6.

121 Sally Chen 和 Joong Shik Kang，“信贷繁荣——中国有何不同？”，国际货币基金组织工作论文 18/2 (2018)：5-6。

122 Brandt et al., "China's Productivity Slowdown," 17.

122 Brandt 等人，“中国生产率放缓”，17。

123 ZGTJNJ, various years, e-book.

123 ZGTJNJ，不同年份，电子书。

124 Yasheng Huang, Capitalism with Chinese Characteristics: Entrepreneurship and the State (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2008).

124 黄亚生，《中国特色资本主义：企业家精神与国家》（纽约：剑桥大学出版社，2008 年）。

125 World Bank and Development Research Center of the State Council of China, China 2030: Building a Modern, Harmonious, and Creative Society (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2013).

125 世界银行和中国国务院发展研究中心，《中国2030：建设现代化、和谐、创新型社会》（华盛顿特区：世界银行，2013年）。





Chapter 6. Revival of Totalitarianism Under Xi Jinping





第六章 习近平治下的极权主义复兴


1 Guillermo O'Donnell and Philippe C. Schmitter, Transitions from Authoritarian Rule: Tentative Conclusions About Uncertain Democracies (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1986), 1-14; Samuel P. Huntington, The Third Wave: Democratization in the Late Twentieth Century (Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1991), 121-40.

1 Guillermo O'Donnell 和 Philippe C. Schmitter，《从威权统治过渡：关于不确定民主的初步结论》（巴尔的摩：约翰·霍普金斯大学出版社，1986 年），第 1-14 页；Samuel P. Huntington，《第三波：二十世纪后期的民主化》（诺曼：俄克拉荷马大学出版社，1991 年），第 121-140 页。

2 Hu Jintao, 胡锦涛在中国共产党第十八次全国代表大会上的报告 [Hu Jintao's report to the Eighteenth Party Congress], 中央政府门户网站 [Central government portal], November 17, 2012, https://www.gov.cn/ldhd/2012-11/17/content_2268826_2.htm.

2 Hu Jintao, 胡锦涛在中国共产党第十八次全国代表大会上的报告 [Hu Jintao's report to the Eighteenth Party Congress], 中央政府门户网站 [Central government portal], November 17, 2012, https://www.gov.cn/ldhd/2012-11/17/content_2268826_2.htm.

3 "Vows of Change in China Belie Private Warning," New York Times, February 14, 2013, https://www.nytimes.com/2013/02/15/world/asia/vowing-reform-chinas-leader-xi-jinping-airs-other-message-in-private.html.

3 “中国变革的誓言掩盖了私下警告”，《纽约时报》，2013 年 2 月 14 日，https://www.nytimes.com/2013/02/15/world/asia/vowing-reform-chinas-leader-xi-jinping-airs-other-message-in-private.html。

4 Xu Jingyue and Huo Xiaoguang, “习近平：毫不动摇坚持和发展中国特色社会主义”[Xi Jinping: Unswervingly uphold and develop socialism with Chinese characteristics], 中央政府门户网站 [Central government portal], January 5, 2013, https://www.gov.cn/ldhd/2013-01/05/content_2305247.htm.

4 Xu Jingyue and Huo Xiaoguang, “习近平：毫不动摇坚持和发展中国特色社会主义”[Xi Jinping: Unswervingly uphold and develop socialism with Chinese characteristics], 中央政府门户网站 [Central government portal], January 5, 2013, https://www.gov.cn/ldhd/2013-01/05/content_2305247.htm.

5 “习近平：关于坚持和发展中国特色社会主义的几个问题”[Xi Jinping: Several issues regarding upholding and developing socialism with Chinese characteristics], 中国共产党新闻网 (Central government portal), April 1, 2019, http://dangjian.people.com.cn/n1/2019/0401/c117092-31006792.html.

5 “习近平：关于坚持和发展中国特色社会主义的几个问题”[Xi Jinping: Several issues regarding upholding and developing socialism with Chinese characteristics], 中国共产党新闻网 (Central government portal), April 1, 2019, http://dangjian.people.com.cn/n1/2019/0401/c117092-31006792.html.

6 “习近平：关于坚持和发展中国特色社会主义的几个问题”

6 “习近平：关于坚持和发展中国特色社会主义的几个问题”

7 Alfred Chan, Xi Jinping: Political Career, Governance, and Leadership, 1953-2018 (New York: Oxford University Press), 301-4.

7 Alfred Chan，《习近平：政治生涯、治理与领导，1953-2018》（纽约：牛津大学出版社），第301-4页。

8 Roy Medvedev, Let History Judge: The Origins and Consequences of Stalinism (New York: Columbia University Press, 1989); Andrew Walder, "Actually Existing Maoism," Australian Journal of Chinese Affairs, no. 18 (1987): 155-66.

8 罗伊·梅德韦杰夫，《让历史评判：斯大林主义的起源和后果》（纽约：哥伦比亚大学出版社，1989 年）；安德鲁·沃尔德，“实际存在的毛主义”，《澳大利亚中国事务杂志》，第 18 期（1987 年）：155-66。

9 Willy Wo-Lap Lam, Chinese Politics in the Era of Xi Jinping: Renaissance, Reform, or Retrogression? (London: Routledge, 2015), 24-25.

9 Willy Wo-Lap Lam，《习近平时代的中国政治：复兴、改革还是倒退？》（伦敦：Routledge出版社，2015年），第24-25页。

10 Chris Buckley, "China Takes Aim at Western Ideas," New York Times, August 19, 2013, https://www.nytimes.com/2013/08/20/world/asia/chinas-new-leadership-takes-hard-line-in-secret-memo.html.

10 Chris Buckley，“中国瞄准西方思想”，《纽约时报》，2013 年 8 月 19 日，https://www.nytimes.com/2013/08/20/world/asia/chinas-new-leadership-takes-hard-line-in-secret-memo.html。

11 Chris Buckley, "Crackdown on Bloggers Is Mounted by China," New York Times, September 10, 2013, https://www.nytimes.com/2013/09/11/world/asia/china-cracks-down-on-online-opinion-makers.html.

11 Chris Buckley，“中国打击博客作者”，《纽约时报》，2013 年 9 月 10 日，https://www.nytimes.com/2013/09/11/world/asia/china-cracks-down-on-online-opinion-makers.html。

12 Tony Lee, "Pernicious Custom? Corruption, Culture, and the Efficacy of Anti-Corruption Campaigning in China," Crime, Law and Social Change, no. 70 (2018): 349-61; Andrew Wedeman, "Anticorruption Campaigns and the Intensification of Corruption in China," Journal of Contemporary China 14, no. 42 (2005): 93-116.

12 Tony Lee，“有害的习俗？腐败、文化和中国反腐败运动的有效性”，《犯罪、法律和社会变革》，第 70 期（2018 年）：349-61；Andrew Wedeman，“反腐败运动与中国腐败的加剧”，《当代中国杂志》14，第 42 期（2005 年）：93-116。

13 “中国共产党章程”[Constitution of the Communist Party of China], 共产党员网 [Communist Party network], October 22, 2022, https://www.12371.cn/special/zggtcdzc/zggtcdzqw/. The party amended its charter several times in the post-Mao era. But the provisions on investigations and penalties for officials who violate party discipline remain unchanged.

13 “中国共产党章程”[Constitution of the Communist Party of China], 共产党员网 [Communist Party network], October 22, 2022, https://www.12371.cn/special/zggtcdzc/zggtcdzqw/. The party amended its charter several times in the post-Mao era. But the provisions on investigations and penalties for officials who violate party discipline remain unchanged.

14 Xuezhi Guo, "Controlling Corruption in the Party: China's Central Discipline Inspection Commission," China Quarterly, no. 219 (2014): 597-624.

14 郭雪之，《控制党内腐败：中国中央纪律检查委员会》，《中国季刊》，219（2014）：597-624。

15 Ling Li, "Politics of Anticorruption in China: Paradigm Change of the Party's Disciplinary Regime 2012-2017," Journal of Contemporary China 28, no. 115 (2019): 47-63; Andrew Wedeman, "Xi Jinping's Tiger Hunt: Anti-Corruption Campaign or Factual Purge?", Modern China Studies 24, no. 2 (2017): 35-94.

15 凌莉，“中国反腐败政治：党的纪律制度的范式转变 2012-2017”，《当代中国》28，第 115 期（2019 年）：47-63；安德鲁·韦德曼，“习近平的猎虎行动：反腐败运动还是事实清洗？”，《现代中国研究》24，第 2 期（2017 年）：35-94。

16 “2022年，至少32名中管干部落马”[At least thirty-two cadres will be dismissed in 2022], 中国新闻周刊 [China news weekly], January 23, 2023, https://www.inewsweek.cn/politics/2023-01-03/17329.shtml.

16 “2022年，至少32名中管干部落马”[At least thirty-two cadres will be dismissed in 2022], 中国新闻周刊 [China news weekly], January 23, 2023, https://www.inewsweek.cn/politics/2023-01-03/17329.shtml.

17 “2023伏虎收官”[Tigers captured in 2023], 财新 [Caixin], December 31, 2023, https://china.caixin.com/2023-12-31/102151756.html; “2024公布被处分中管干部增至60人,” [The published number of punished centrally supervised cadres rose to 60 in 2024], 财新 [Caixin], December 16, 2024, https://china.caixin.com/2024-12-16/102268377.html.

17 “2023伏虎收官”[Tigers captured in 2023], 财新 [Caixin], December 31, 2023, https://china.caixin.com/2023-12-31/102151756.html; “2024公布被处分中管干部增至60人,” [The published number of punished centrally supervised cadres rose to 60 in 2024], 财新 [Caixin], December 16, 2024, https://china.caixin.com/2024-12-16/102268377.html.

18 “中共中央,中共中央决定给予周永康开除党籍处分移送司法机关”[Central Committee of the Communist Party of China decides to expel Zhou Yongkang from the party and transfer him to the judicial authorities],中央政府门户网站 [Central government portal], December 6, 2014, https://www.gov.cn/govweb/xinwen/2014-12/06/content_2787500.htm;“周永康一审被判处无期徒刑”[Zhou Yongkang is sentenced to life imprisonment in the first instance], Xinhuahe, June 11, 2015, http://www.xinhuanet.com/politics/2015-06/11/c_1115590304.htm.

18 “中共中央,中共中央决定给予周永康开除党籍处分移送司法机关”[Central Committee of the Communist Party of China decides to expel Zhou Yongkang from the party and transfer him to the judicial authorities],中央政府门户网站 [Central government portal], December 6, 2014, https://www.gov.cn/govweb/xinwen/2014-12/06/content_2787500.htm;“周永康一审被判处无期徒刑”[Zhou Yongkang is sentenced to life imprisonment in the first instance], Xinhuahe, June 11, 2015, http://www.xinhuanet.com/politics/2015-06/11/c_1115590304.htm.

19 “十八大以来已有45名军老虎落马”[Since the Eighteenth Party Congress, 45 military tigers have been dismissed],北京青年报[Beijing youth daily],November 14,2015,https://news .qingdaonews.com/zonghe/2015-11/14/content_11354144.htm.

19 “十八大以来已有45名军老虎落马”[Since the Eighteenth Party Congress, 45 military tigers have been dismissed],北京青年报[Beijing youth daily],November 14,2015,https://news .qingdaonews.com/zonghe/2015-11/14/content_11354144.htm.

20 Ding Miao, “中共十八大后落马‘军虎’增至75人” [The number of “military tigers” dismissed after the Eighteenth Party Congress increases to 75], 财新 [Caixin], October 29, 2019, https://datanews.caixin.com/m/2019-10-29/101476521.html.

20 Ding Miao, “中共十八大后落马‘军虎’增至75人” [The number of “military tigers” dismissed after the Eighteenth Party Congress increases to 75], 财新 [Caixin], October 29, 2019, https://datanews.caixin.com/m/2019-10-29/101476521.html.

21 Kainan Gao and Margaret Pearson, "The Role of Political Networks in Anti-corruption Investigations," China Review 22, no. 2 (2022): 81-111.

21 Kainan Gao 和 Margaret Pearson，“政治网络在反腐败调查中的作用”，《中国评论》22，第 2 期（2022 年）：81-111。

22 CCP Central Commission for Discipline Inspection, “中共中央纪律检查委员会向党的第十五次全国代表大会的工作报告” [Work report of the CCP Central Commission for Discipline Inspection to the Fifteenth Party Congress], 共产党员网 [Communist Party member network], September 9, 1997, https://news.12371.cn/2017/09/21/ARTI1505963461358568.shtml; CCP Central Commission for Discipline Inspection, “中央纪委向党的十六大的工作报告” [Work report of the Central Commission for Discipline Inspection to the Sixteenth Party Congress], 中央监察部网站 [Central Commission for Discipline Inspection and Ministry of Supervision website], November 14, 2002, https://www.ccdi.gov.cn/xxgk/hyzl/201307/t20130726_114134.html; CCP Central Commission for Discipline Inspection, “十八届中央纪律检查委员会向中国共产党第十九次全国代表大会的工作报告” [Work report of the Eighteenth Central Commission for Discipline Inspection to the Nineteenth Party Congress], 中华人民共和国驻乌拉圭东岸共和国大使馆 [Embassy of the PRC in the Eastern Republic of Uruguay], October 24, 2017, http://uy.china-embassy.gov.cn/ztbd/shijiuda/201710/t20171031_4691291.htm.

22 CCP Central Commission for Discipline Inspection, “中共中央纪律检查委员会向党的第十五次全国代表大会的工作报告” [Work report of the CCP Central Commission for Discipline Inspection to the Fifteenth Party Congress], 共产党员网 [Communist Party member network], September 9, 1997, https://news.12371.cn/2017/09/21/ARTI1505963461358568.shtml; CCP Central Commission for Discipline Inspection, “中央纪委向党的十六大的工作报告” [Work report of the Central Commission for Discipline Inspection to the Sixteenth Party Congress], 中央监察部网站 [Central Commission for Discipline Inspection and Ministry of Supervision website], November 14, 2002, https://www.ccdi.gov.cn/xxgk/hyzl/201307/t20130726_114134.html; CCP Central Commission for Discipline Inspection, “十八届中央纪律检查委员会向中国共产党第十九次全国代表大会的工作报告” [Work report of the Eighteenth Central Commission for Discipline Inspection to the Nineteenth Party Congress], 中华人民共和国驻乌拉圭东岸共和国大使馆 [Embassy of the PRC in the Eastern Republic of Uruguay], October 24, 2017, http://uy.china-embassy.gov.cn/ztbd/shijiuda/201710/t20171031_4691291.htm.

23 Zhong Yuhao, “中纪委公布十八大以来被查的中央委员、中央候补委员人数”[Central Commission for Discipline Inspection announces the number of Central Committee members and alternate members who have been investigated since the Eighteenth Party Congress], 澎湃新闻 [The paper], October 17, 2022, https://m.thepaper.cn/newsDetail_forward_20332452. The data for 1992-2012 were obtained by examining the backgrounds of the disgraced high-ranking officials.

23 Zhong Yuhao, “中纪委公布十八大以来被查的中央委员、中央候补委员人数”[Central Commission for Discipline Inspection announces the number of Central Committee members and alternate members who have been investigated since the Eighteenth Party Congress], 澎湃新闻 [The paper], October 17, 2022, https://m.thepaper.cn/newsDetail_forward_20332452. The data for 1992-2012 were obtained by examining the backgrounds of the disgraced high-ranking officials.

24 Sheena Chestnut Greitens, "The Saohei Campaign, Protection Umbrellas, and China's Changing Political-Legal Apparatus," China Leadership Monitor, no. 65 (2020), https://www.prcleader.org/post/the-saohei-campaign-protection-umbrellas-and-china-s-changing-political-legal-apparatus.

24 Sheena Chestnut Greitens，“早熙运动、保护伞和中国不断变化的政治法律机制”，《中国领导力观察》，第 65 期（2020 年），https://www.prcleader.org/post/the-saohei-campaign-protection-umbrellas-and-china-s-changing-political-legal-apparatus。

25 “公安部原党委委员副部长孙力军严重违纪违法被开除党籍和公职”[Sun Lijun, former member of the Party Committee and vice minister of the Ministry of Public Security, is expelled from the party and public office for serious violations of discipline and the law], Xinhuaeshe, September 30, 2021, http://www.news.cn/politics/2021-09/30/c_1127922308.htm.

25 “公安部原党委委员副部长孙力军严重违纪违法被开除党籍和公职”[Sun Lijun, former member of the Party Committee and vice minister of the Ministry of Public Security, is expelled from the party and public office for serious violations of discipline and the law], Xinhuaeshe, September 30, 2021, http://www.news.cn/politics/2021-09/30/c_1127922308.htm.

26 “已有几十位政法委书记落马”[Dozens of secretaries of political and legal committees have been dismissed], 网易 [NetEase], July 23, 2022, https://www.163.com/dy/article/HCVH8QM405435FFX.html.

26 “已有几十位政法委书记落马”[Dozens of secretaries of political and legal committees have been dismissed], 网易 [NetEase], July 23, 2022, https://www.163.com/dy/article/HCVH8QM405435FFX.html.

27 “陈一新：全国第一批政法队伍教育整顿取得四个阶段性成效”[Chen Yixin: The rectification of the first batch of political and legal teams has achieved “four stages of results”], 中国政府法制信息网 [China government legal network], June 10, 2021,http://www.moj.gov.cn/pub/sfbgw/gxwx/xwyw/ywzfyw/202106/t20210610_427220.html.

27 “陈一新：全国第一批政法队伍教育整顿取得四个阶段性成效”[Chen Yixin: The rectification of the first batch of political and legal teams has achieved “four stages of results”], 中国政府法制信息网 [China government legal network], June 10, 2021,http://www.moj.gov.cn/pub/sfbgw/gxwx/xwyw/ywzfyw/202106/t20210610_427220.html.

28 “八项规定”[Eight provisions], 中国共产党新闻网 [CPC news], http://dangjian.people.com.cn/GB/399416/399420/399445/index.html.

28 “八项规定”[Eight provisions], 中国共产党新闻网 [CPC news], http://dangjian.people.com.cn/GB/399416/399420/399445/index.html.

29 “中国共产党纪律处分条例 (2003)”（Disciplinary punishment regulations of the Chinese Communist Party (2003)），中国科学院理论物理研究所 (Institute of Theoretical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences), January 24, 2004, http://www.itp.cas.cn/djykxwh/llxx/dnfg/202011/t20201124_5777782.html.“中国共产党纪律处分条例（2015）”[Disciplinary punishment regulations of the Chinese Communist Party (2015)], 国家能源局 [National Energy Administration], October 26, 2015, http://www.nea.gov.cn/2015-10/26/c_134749716.htm.

29 “中国共产党纪律处分条例 (2003)”（Disciplinary punishment regulations of the Chinese Communist Party (2003)），中国科学院理论物理研究所 (Institute of Theoretical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences), January 24, 2004, http://www.itp.cas.cn/djykxwh/llxx/dnfg/202011/t20201124_5777782.html.“中国共产党纪律处分条例（2015）”[Disciplinary punishment regulations of the Chinese Communist Party (2015)], 国家能源局 [National Energy Administration], October 26, 2015, http://www.nea.gov.cn/2015-10/26/c_134749716.htm.

30 “中华人民共和国监察法” [Supervision law of the People's Republic of China], 中华人民共和国中央人民政府 [People's government of the PRC], March 26, 2018, https://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2018-03/26/content_5277463.htm.

30 “中华人民共和国监察法” [Supervision law of the People's Republic of China], 中华人民共和国中央人民政府 [People's government of the PRC], March 26, 2018, https://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2018-03/26/content_5277463.htm.

31 Minxin Pei, "How Not to Fight Corruption: Lessons from China," Daedalus 147, no. 3 (2018): 216-30.

31 裴敏欣，“如何不打击腐败：来自中国的经验教训”，《代达罗斯》147，第3期（2018年）：216-30。

32 Xuezhi Guo, The Politics of the Core Leader in China: Culture, Institution, Legitimacy, and Power (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2019); Alice Miller, "Core Leaders, Authoritative Persons, and Reform Pushback," China Leadership Monitor, no. 50 (2016): 1-12, https://www.hoover.org/publications/china-leadership-monitor/summer-2016-issue-50.

32 郭雪之，《中国核心领导的政治：文化、制度、合法性和权力》（纽约：剑桥大学出版社，2019 年）；Alice Miller，“核心领导、权威人物和改革阻力”，《中国领导力观察》，第 50 期（2016 年）：1-12，https://www.hoover.org/publications/china-leadership-monitor/summer-2016-issue-50。

33 “中国共产党第十八届中央委员会第六次全体会议公报”[Communique of the Sixth Plenary Session of the 18th CCP Central Committee], 共产党员网 [Communist Party member network], October 27, 2016, https://news.12371.cn/2016/10/27/ARTI1477566918346559.shtml.

33 “中国共产党第十八届中央委员会第六次全体会议公报”[Communique of the Sixth Plenary Session of the 18th CCP Central Committee], 共产党员网 [Communist Party member network], October 27, 2016, https://news.12371.cn/2016/10/27/ARTI1477566918346559.shtml.

34 Elizabeth Economy, "China's Imperial President: Xi Jinping Tightens His Grip," Foreign Affairs 93, no. 6 (2014): 80-91; Wen-Hsuan Tsai and Wang Zhou, "Integrated Fragmentation and the Role of Leading Small Groups in Chinese Politics," China Journal, no. 82 (2019): 1-22.

34 Elizabeth Economy，“中国的帝王主席：习近平加强了控制”，《外交事务》93，第6期（2014年）：80-91；Wen-Hsuan Tsai和Wang Zhou，“整合碎片化与中国政治中领导小团体的作用”，《中国期刊》82期（2019年）：1-22。

35 “中共中央政治局召开会议” [Politburo of the CCP Central Committee holds a meeting], Xinhuashe, October 27, 2017, http://www.xinhuanet.com/politics/19pcncc/2017-10/27/c_1121868508.htm.

35 “中共中央政治局召开会议” [Politburo of the CCP Central Committee holds a meeting], Xinhuashe, October 27, 2017, http://www.xinhuanet.com/politics/19pcncc/2017-10/27/c_1121868508.htm.

36 “中国共产党第十一届中央委员会, 关于党内政治生活的若干准则” [Eleventh CCP Central Committee, several guidelines on inner-party political life], 共产党员网 [Communist Party member network], February 29, 1980, https://news.12371.cn/2015/03/11/ARTI1426059362559711.shtml.

36 “中国共产党第十一届中央委员会, 关于党内政治生活的若干准则” [Eleventh CCP Central Committee, several guidelines on inner-party political life], 共产党员网 [Communist Party member network], February 29, 1980, https://news.12371.cn/2015/03/11/ARTI1426059362559711.shtml.

37 “中国共产党第十八届中央委员会, 关于新形势下党内政治生活的若干准则” [Eighthenth CCP Central Committee, some guidelines for political life within the party under the new situation], 共产党员网 [Communist Party member network], October 27, 2016, https://news.12371.cn/2016/11/02/ARTI1478091665764299.shtml.

37 “中国共产党第十八届中央委员会, 关于新形势下党内政治生活的若干准则” [Eighthenth CCP Central Committee, some guidelines for political life within the party under the new situation], 共产党员网 [Communist Party member network], October 27, 2016, https://news.12371.cn/2016/11/02/ARTI1478091665764299.shtml.

38 “中共中央关于党的百年奋斗重大成就和历史经验的决议”[Resolution of the CCP Central Committee on the party's major achievements and historical experience during its centenary of struggle], 中华人民共和国中央人民政府 [PRC Central People's Government], November 11, 2021, http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/2021-11/16/content_5651269.htm.

38 “中共中央关于党的百年奋斗重大成就和历史经验的决议”[Resolution of the CCP Central Committee on the party's major achievements and historical experience during its centenary of struggle], 中华人民共和国中央人民政府 [PRC Central People's Government], November 11, 2021, http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/2021-11/16/content_5651269.htm.

39 “中华人民共和国宪法修正案”[Amendments to the PRC Constitution], 中国人大网 [National People's Congress network], March 11, 2018, http://www.npc.gov.cn/zgrdw/npc/xinwen/2018-03/12/content_2049190.htm.

39 “中华人民共和国宪法修正案”[Amendments to the PRC Constitution], 中国人大网 [National People's Congress network], March 11, 2018, http://www.npc.gov.cn/zgrdw/npc/xinwen/2018-03/12/content_2049190.htm.

40 "Document 9: A ChinaFile Translation," November 8, 2013, https://www.chinafile.com/document-9-chinafile-translation.

40 “文件 9：ChinaFile 翻译”，2013 年 11 月 8 日，https://www.chinafile.com/document-9-chinafile-translation。

41 Xi Jinping, “把宣传思想工作做得更好” [Advance publicity and theoretical work], in谈治国理政 [The governance of China] (Beijing: Foreign Languages Press, 2014), 153-57.

41 Xi Jinping, “把宣传思想工作做得更好” [Advance publicity and theoretical work], in谈治国理政 [The governance of China] (Beijing: Foreign Languages Press, 2014), 153-57.

42 “31位省（市区）党委宣传部长畅谈学习总书记8·19重要讲话”[31 propaganda heads of provincial (municipal) party committees talk about studying the important speech by the general secretary on August 19], 中国共产党新闻网 [Chinese Communist news network], August 30, 2013, http://theory.people.com.cn/n/2013/0830/c83855-22748014.html.

42 “31位省（市区）党委宣传部长畅谈学习总书记8·19重要讲话”[31 propaganda heads of provincial (municipal) party committees talk about studying the important speech by the general secretary on August 19], 中国共产党新闻网 [Chinese Communist news network], August 30, 2013, http://theory.people.com.cn/n/2013/0830/c83855-22748014.html.

43 “打击网络谣言幕后：有关部门曾发文严防扩大化” [Behind the scenes of cracking down on internet rumors: Relevant departments issue a document to strictly prevent their expansion], 新浪 [Sina], September 6, 2013, http://news.sina.com.cn/c/sd/2013-09-06/021028143964.shtml.

43 “打击网络谣言幕后：有关部门曾发文严防扩大化” [Behind the scenes of cracking down on internet rumors: Relevant departments issue a document to strictly prevent their expansion], 新浪 [Sina], September 6, 2013, http://news.sina.com.cn/c/sd/2013-09-06/021028143964.shtml.

44 最高人民法院 [Supreme People's Court] and 最高人民检察院 [Supreme People's Procurator], “关于办理利用信息网络实施诽谤等刑事案件适用法律若干问题的解释” [Interpretation of several issues concerning the application of laws in the handling of criminal cases such as defamation using information networks], 检察日 [Procuratorate daily], September 10, 2013, https://www.spp.gov.cn/spp/zdgz/201309/t20130910_62417.shtml.

44 最高人民法院 [Supreme People's Court] and 最高人民检察院 [Supreme People's Procurator], “关于办理利用信息网络实施诽谤等刑事案件适用法律若干问题的解释” [Interpretation of several issues concerning the application of laws in the handling of criminal cases such as defamation using information networks], 检察日 [Procuratorate daily], September 10, 2013, https://www.spp.gov.cn/spp/zdgz/201309/t20130910_62417.shtml.

45 Mary Gallagher and Blake Miller, "Who Not What: The Logic of China's Information Control Strategy," China Quarterly, no. 248 (2021): 1011-36.

45 Mary Gallagher 和 Blake Miller，“谁而不是什么：中国信息控制战略的逻辑”，《中国季刊》，第 248 期（2021 年）：1011-36。

46 Rogier Greemers, "Cyber China: Upgrading Propaganda, Public Opinion Work and Social Management for the Twenty-First Century," Journal of Contemporary China 26, no. 103 (2017): 85-100.

46 Rogier Greemers，“网络中国：二十一世纪的宣传、舆论工作和社会管理升级”，《当代中国》26，第103期（2017年）：85-100。

47 “中华人民共和国网络安全法”[Cybersecurity law of the PRC], 中华人民共和国中央人民政府 [Central People's Government of the PRC], November 7, 2016, https://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2016-11/07/content_5129723.htm.

47 “中华人民共和国网络安全法”[Cybersecurity law of the PRC], 中华人民共和国中央人民政府 [Central People's Government of the PRC], November 7, 2016, https://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2016-11/07/content_5129723.htm.

48 Eva Pils, "The Party's Turn to Public Repression: An Analysis of the '709' Crackdown on Human Rights Lawyers in China," China Law and Society Review 3, no. 1 (2018): 1-48.

48 Eva Pils，“党转向公共镇压：对中国人权律师‘709’镇压的分析”，《中国法律与社会评论》3，第1期（2018）：1-48。

49 Tom Mitchell, "China Crackdown on Labour Activism Bolstered by Court Ruling," Financial Times, April 15, 2014, https://www.ft.com/content/aa194620-c46d-11e3-8dd4-00144feabdc0; Michael Forsythe and Chris Buckley, "China Arrests at Least 3 Workers' Rights Leaders Amid Rising Unrest," New York Times, December 6, 2015, https://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/06/world/asia/china-arrests-at-least-3-workers-rights-leaders-amid-rising-unrest.html.

49 Tom Mitchell，“法院裁决加强了中国对劳工维权活动的镇压”，《金融时报》，2014年4月15日，https://www.ft.com/content/aa194620-c46d-11e3-8dd4-00144feabdc0；Michael Forsythe 和 Chris Buckley，“在动荡加剧之际，中国逮捕了至少3名工人权益领袖”，《纽约时报》，2015年12月6日，https://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/06/world/asia/china-arrests-at-least-3-workers-rights-leaders-amid-rising-unrest.html。

50 Ben Westcott and Yong Xiong, "Young Marxists Are Going Missing in China After Protesting for Workers," CNN, November 14, 2018, https://www.cnn.com/2018/11/13/asia/china-student-marxist-missing-intl/index.html.

50 Ben Westcott 和 Yong Xiong，“中国青年马克思主义者在为工人抗议后失踪”，CNN，2018 年 11 月 14 日，https://www.cnn.com/2018/11/13/asia/china-student-marxist-missing-intl/index.html。

51 Ivan Franceschini and Elisa Nesossi, "State Repression of Chinese Labor NGOs: A Chilling Effect?", China Journal, no. 80 (2018): 111-29.

51 Ivan Franceschini 和 Elisa Nesossi，“国家镇压中国劳工非政府组织：寒蝉效应？”，《中国期刊》，第 80 期（2018 年）：111-29。

52 Han Zhu and Lu Jun, "The Crackdown on Rights-Advocacy NGOs in Xi's China: Politicizing the Law and Legalizing the Repression," Journal of Contemporary China 31, no. 136 (2022): 518-38.

52 韩竹、卢军，《习近平时代的中国对维权非政府组织的镇压：法律政治化和镇压合法化》，《当代中国》31，第136期（2022年）：518-38。

53 John Ruwitch, "China Professor Says Sacked for Criticizing President and Not Recanting," Reuters, December 10, 2013, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-china-professor/china-professor-says-sacked-for-criticizing-president-and-not-recanting-idUSBRE9BA04W20131211.

53 John Ruwitch，“中国教授称因批评总统而被解雇且未收回言论”，路透社，2013 年 12 月 10 日，https://www.reuters.com/article/us-china-professor/china-professor-says-sacked-for-criticizing-president-and-not-recanting-idUSBRE9BA04W20131211。

54 He Haiwei, “被学生举报的中国大学教授后来怎么了” [What happened to the Chinese university professor who was reported on by his students?], New York Times (Chinese edition), November 13, 2019, https://cn.nytimes.com/china/20191113/china-informer-professor/; “这些年受处分的大学老师” [The university professors who have been punished over the years], China Digital Times, October 14, 2020, https://chinadigitaltimes.net/chinese/657214.html.

54 He Haiwei, “被学生举报的中国大学教授后来怎么了” [What happened to the Chinese university professor who was reported on by his students?], New York Times (Chinese edition), November 13, 2019, https://cn.nytimes.com/china/20191113/china-informer-professor/; “这些年受处分的大学老师” [The university professors who have been punished over the years], China Digital Times, October 14, 2020, https://chinadigitaltimes.net/chinese/657214.html.

55 Ben Westcott and Nectar Gan, "Chinese Academic Who Criticized Leader Xi Jinping Allegedly Fired from Top University," CNN, July 14, 2020, https://www.cnn.com/2020/07/14/asia/xu-zhangrun-arrested-fired-tsinghua-intl-hnk/index.html.

55 Ben Westcott 和 Nectar Gan，“批评领导人习近平的中国学者据称被顶尖大学解雇”，CNN，2020 年 7 月 14 日，https://www.cnn.com/2020/07/14/asia/xu-zhangrun-arrested-fired-tsinghua-intl-hnk/index.html。

56 Gu Ting, “原贵州大学教授杨绍政被以“煽颠罪”判刑四年半”[Former Guizhou University professor Yang Shaozheng is sentenced to four and a half years in prison for “inciting subversion”], RFA, August 31, 2023, https://www.rfa.org/mandarin/yataibaodao/renquanfazhi/gt2-083120230242136.html.

56 Gu Ting, “原贵州大学教授杨绍政被以“煽颠罪”判刑四年半”[Former Guizhou University professor Yang Shaozheng is sentenced to four and a half years in prison for “inciting subversion”], RFA, August 31, 2023, https://www.rfa.org/mandarin/yataibaodao/renquanfazhi/gt2-083120230242136.html.

57 Xiaojun Yan, "Engineering Stability: Authoritarian Political Control Over University Students in Post-Deng China," China Quarterly, no. 218 (2014): 493-513; Javier C. Hernández, "Professors, Beware. In China, Student Spies Might Be Watching," New York Times, November 1, 2019, https://www.nytimes.com/2019/11/01/world/asia/china-student-informers.html.

57 Xiaojun Yan，“工程稳定：后邓小平时代中国对大学生的威权政治控制”，《中国季刊》，第218期（2014年）：493-513；Javier C. Hernández，“教授们，当心。在中国，学生间谍可能正在监视你们”，《纽约时报》，2019年11月1日，https://www.nytimes.com/2019/11/01/world/asia/china-student-informers.html。

58 “中华人民共和国教育部，新时代高校教师职业行为十项准则”[Ministry of Education: Ten codes of professional conduct for college teachers in the new era], 中华人民共和国教育部 [PRC Ministry of Education], November 14, 2018, http://www.moe.gov.cn/srcsite/A10/s7002/201811/t20181115_354921.html.

58 “中华人民共和国教育部，新时代高校教师职业行为十项准则”[Ministry of Education: Ten codes of professional conduct for college teachers in the new era], 中华人民共和国教育部 [PRC Ministry of Education], November 14, 2018, http://www.moe.gov.cn/srcsite/A10/s7002/201811/t20181115_354921.html.

59 “中共中央,中华人民共和国境外非政府组织境内活动管理法”[CCP Central Committee, law of the PRC on the administration of domestic activities by overseas nongovernmental organizations], 中国人大网 [National People's Congress network], November 28, 2017, http://www.npc.gov.cn/zgrdw/npc/xinwen/2017-11/28/content_2032719.htm.

59 “中共中央,中华人民共和国境外非政府组织境内活动管理法”[CCP Central Committee, law of the PRC on the administration of domestic activities by overseas nongovernmental organizations], 中国人大网 [National People's Congress network], November 28, 2017, http://www.npc.gov.cn/zgrdw/npc/xinwen/2017-11/28/content_2032719.htm.

60 "Clampdown in China Restricts 7,000 Foreign Organizations," New York Times, April 28, 2016, https://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/29/world/asia/china-foreign-ngo-law.html; "China Law Puts Foreign NGOs Under Tighter Control," Financial Times, April 22, 2018, https://www.ft.com/content/a61994da-3ec1-11e8-b7e0-52972418fec4.

60 “中国严厉打击7000个外国组织”，《纽约时报》，2016年4月28日，https://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/29/world/asia/china-foreign-ngo-law.html；“中国法律加强对外国非政府组织的控制”，《金融时报》，2018年4月22日，https://www.ft.com/content/a61994da-3ec1-11e8-b7e0-52972418fec4。

61 CCP 18th Central Committee, “十八届三中全会全面深化改革若干重大问题决定” [The Third Plenary Session of the Eighteenth CCP Central Committee decides to comprehensively deepen reforms on several major issues], 中华人民共和国中央人民政府 [Central People's Government], November 15, 2013, https://www.gov.cn/jrzg/2013-11/15/content_2528179.htm.

61 CCP 18th Central Committee, “十八届三中全会全面深化改革若干重大问题决定” [The Third Plenary Session of the Eighteenth CCP Central Committee decides to comprehensively deepen reforms on several major issues], 中华人民共和国中央人民政府 [Central People's Government], November 15, 2013, https://www.gov.cn/jrzg/2013-11/15/content_2528179.htm.

62 State Council, “社会信用体系建设规划纲要（2014-2020年）”[Construction planning outline of the social credit system (2014-2020)], 中华人民共和国中央人民政府 [Central [People's Government], June 14, 2014, http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/content/2014-06/27/content_8913.htm.

62 State Council, “社会信用体系建设规划纲要（2014-2020年）”[Construction planning outline of the social credit system (2014-2020)], 中华人民共和国中央人民政府 [Central [People's Government], June 14, 2014, http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/content/2014-06/27/content_8913.htm.

63 Josh Chin and Liza Lin, Surveillance State: Inside China's Quest to Launch a New Era of Social Control (NY: St. Martins, 2022); Minxin Pei, "Grid Management: China's Latest Institutional Tool of Social Control," China Leadership Monitor, no. 67 (2021), https://www.prcleader.org/post/grid-management-china-s-latest-institutional-tool-of-social-control; Fan Liang et al., "Constructing a Data-Driven Society: China's Social Credit System as a State Surveillance Infrastructure," Policy & Internet 10, no. 4 (2018): 415-53.

63 Josh Chin 和 Liza Lin，《监控国家：中国开启社会控制新时代的探索》（纽约：圣马丁出版社，2022 年）；裴敏欣，“网格管理：中国最新的社会控制制度工具”，《中国领导力观察》，第 67 期（2021 年），https://www.prcleader.org/post/grid-management-china-s-latest-institutional-tool-of-social-control；梁帆等，“构建数据驱动型社会：中国的社会信用体系作为国家监控基础设施”，《政策与互联网》10，第 4 期（2018 年）：415-53。

64 Colin Mackerras, "Xinjiang at the Turn of the Century: The Causes of Separatism," Central Asian Survey 20, no. 3 (2001): 289-303; James Millward, Violent Separatism in Xinjiang: A Critical Assessment (Washington, DC: East-West Center, 2004).

64 Colin Mackerras，“世纪之交的新疆：分裂主义的原因”，《中亚研究》20，第 3 期（2001 年）：289-303；James Millward，《新疆的暴力分裂主义：批判性评估》（华盛顿特区：东西方中心，2004 年）。

65 Nicolas Becquelin, "Staged Development in Xinjiang," China Quarterly, no. 178 (2004): 358-78; Michael Clarke, "China's 'War on Terror' in Xinjiang: Human Security and the Causes of Violent Uighur Separatism," Terrorism and Political Violence 20, no. 2 (2008): 271-301.

65 Nicolas Becquelin，“新疆的分阶段发展”，《中国季刊》，第 178 期（2004 年）：358-78；Michael Clarke，“中国在新疆的‘反恐战争’：人类安全与维吾尔族暴力分裂主义的原因”，《恐怖主义与政治暴力》20，第 2 期（2008 年）：271-301。

66 Chien-peng Chung, "China's Uyghur Problem After the 2009 Urumqi Riot: Repression, Recompense, Readiness, Resistance," Journal of Policing, Intelligence and Counter Terrorism 13, no. 2 (2018): 185-201.

66 钟建鹏，《2009 年乌鲁木齐骚乱后中国的维吾尔问题：镇压、补偿、准备、抵抗》，《警务、情报和反恐杂志》13，第 2 期（2018 年）：185-201。

67 Adrian Zenz and James Leibold, "Chen Quanguo: The Strongman Behind Beijing's Securitization Strategy in Tibet and Xinjiang," China Brief 17, no. 12 (2017): 16-24, https://jamestown.org/program/chen-quanguo-the-strongman-behind-beijings-securitization-strategy-in-tibet-and-xinjiang/.

67 Adrian Zenz 和 James Leibold，“陈全国：北京在西藏和新疆安全化战略背后的强人”，《中国简报》17，第 12 期（2017 年）：16-24，https://jamestown.org/program/chen-quanguo-the-strongman-behind-beijings-securitization-strategy-in-tibet-and-xinjiang/。

68 Michael Clarke, ed., The Xinjiang Emergency: Exploring the Causes and Consequences of China's Mass Detention of Uyghurs (Manchester, UK: Manchester University Press, 2022).

68 Michael Clarke 编，《新疆紧急情况：探究中国大规模拘留维吾尔人的原因和后果》（英国曼彻斯特：曼彻斯特大学出版社，2022 年）。

69 James Leibold, "Surveillance in China's Xinjiang Region: Ethnic Sorting, Coercion, and Inducement," Journal of Contemporary China 29, no. 121 (2020): 46-60.

69 James Leibold，“中国新疆地区的监视：种族分类、胁迫和诱导”，《当代中国杂志》29，第 121 期（2020 年）：46-60。

70 “中华人民共和国政府和大不列颠及北爱尔兰联合王国政府关于香港问题的联合声明”[Joint statement of the government of the PRC and the government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland on the question of Hong Kong], 中华人民共和国香港特别行政区政府政制及内地事务局 [Constitutional and Mainland Affairs Bureau, government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region], December 19, 1984, https://www.cmab.gov.hk/gb/issues/jd2.htm.

70 “中华人民共和国政府和大不列颠及北爱尔兰联合王国政府关于香港问题的联合声明”[Joint statement of the government of the PRC and the government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland on the question of Hong Kong], 中华人民共和国香港特别行政区政府政制及内地事务局 [Constitutional and Mainland Affairs Bureau, government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region], December 19, 1984, https://www.cmab.gov.hk/gb/issues/jd2.htm.

71 “中华人民共和国香港特别行政区基本法”[Basic Law of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the PRC], 中国政府门户网站 [Chinese government portal], April 4, 1990, https://www.gov.cn/test/2005-07/29/content_18298.htm.

71 “中华人民共和国香港特别行政区基本法”[Basic Law of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the PRC], 中国政府门户网站 [Chinese government portal], April 4, 1990, https://www.gov.cn/test/2005-07/29/content_18298.htm.

72 Ho-fung Hung, City on the Edge: Hong Kong under Chinese Rule (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2022); Brian Fong, "One Country, Two Nationalisms: Center-Periphery Relations Between Mainland China and Hong Kong, 1997-2016," Modern China 43, no. 5 (2017): 523-56; Ming Sing, ed., Politics and Government in Hong Kong: Crisis Under Chinese Sovereignty (London: Routledge, 2008).

72 洪浩峰，《边缘之城：中国统治下的香港》（纽约：剑桥大学出版社，2022 年）；方文杰，《一国两民族主义：1997-2016 年中国大陆与香港的中心-边缘关系》，《现代中国》43，第 5 期（2017 年）：523-56；宋明编，《香港的政治与政府：中国主权下的危机》（伦敦：劳特利奇出版社，2008 年）。

73 “‘一国两制’在香港特别行政区的实践白皮书”[White paper on the practice of “one country, two systems” in the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region], 国务院新闻办公室 [State Council Information Office], June 10, 2014, http://www.scio.gov.cn/ztk/dtzt/2014/31039/31042/Document/1372893/1372893.htm.

73 “‘一国两制’在香港特别行政区的实践白皮书”[White paper on the practice of “one country, two systems” in the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region], 国务院新闻办公室 [State Council Information Office], June 10, 2014, http://www.scio.gov.cn/ztk/dtzt/2014/31039/31042/Document/1372893/1372893.htm.

74 Stephan Ortmann, "The Umbrella Movement and Hong Kong's Protracted Democratization Process," Asian Affairs 46, no. 1 (2015): 32-50.

74 Stephan Ortmann，“雨伞运动与香港漫长的民主化进程”，《亚洲事务》46，第1期（2015年）：32-50。

75 Xi Jinping, “在庆祝香港回归祖国20周年大会暨香港特别行政区第五届政府就职典礼上的讲话” [Speech at the celebration of the twentieth anniversary of Hong Kong's return to the motherland and the inauguration ceremony of the fifth government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region], Xinhuaeshe [New China News Agency], July 1, 2017, http://www.xinhuanet.com//politics/2017-07/01/c_1121247124.htm.

75 Xi Jinping, “在庆祝香港回归祖国20周年大会暨香港特别行政区第五届政府就职典礼上的讲话” [Speech at the celebration of the twentieth anniversary of Hong Kong's return to the motherland and the inauguration ceremony of the fifth government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region], Xinhuaeshe [New China News Agency], July 1, 2017, http://www.xinhuanet.com//politics/2017-07/01/c_1121247124.htm.

76 Martin Purbrick, "A Report of the 2019 Hong Kong Protests," Asian Affairs 50, no. 4 (2019): 465-87.

76 Martin Purbrick，“2019 年香港抗议活动报告”，《亚洲事务》50，第 4 期（2019 年）：465-87。

77 Michael Davis, Freedom Undone: The Assault on Liberal Values and Institutions in Hong Kong (New York: Columbia University Press, 2024).

77 Michael Davis，《自由的丧失：香港自由价值观和制度的攻击》（纽约：哥伦比亚大学出版社，2024 年）。

78 Kimberly Lim and Su-Lin Tan, "Hong Kong's Talent Exodus to Singapore: Can It Be Reversed and Is 'A New Wave of Expats' Inbound?," South China Morning Post, February 4, 2023, https://www.scmp.com/week-asia/people/article/3209048/hong-kongs-talent-exodus-singapore-can-it-be-reversed-and-new-wave-expats-inbound.

78 Kimberly Lim 和 Su-Lin Tan，“香港人才外流到新加坡：能否扭转局面，‘新一波外籍人士’即将涌入？”，《南华早报》，2023 年 2 月 4 日，https://www.scmp.com/week-asia/people/article/3209048/hong-kongs-talent-exodus-singapore-can-it-be-reversed-and-new-wave-expats-inbound。

79 Yuhua Wang and Carl Minzner, “The Rise of the Chinese Security State,” China Quarterly, no. 222 (2015): 339-59.

79 王玉华和卡尔·明兹纳，《中国安全国家的崛起》，《中国季刊》，第222期（2015年）：339-59。

80 Margaret Roberts, Censored: Distraction and Diversion Inside China's Great Firewall (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2018).

80 玛格丽特·罗伯茨，《审查：中国防火墙内的干扰与转移》（新泽西州普林斯顿：普林斯顿大学出版社，2018 年）。

81 Joseph Fewsmith, Rethinking Chinese Politics (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2021).

81 Joseph Fewsmith，《重新思考中国政治》（纽约：剑桥大学出版社，2021 年）。

82 Lily Kuo, "Rare Protests Against China's 'Zero Covid' Policy Erupt Across Country," Washington Post, November 27, 2022, https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2022/11/27/china-covid-lockdown-protest-xinjiang/.

82 Lily Kuo，“中国‘零新冠’政策引发全国罕见抗议”，《华盛顿邮报》，2022 年 11 月 27 日，https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2022/11/27/china-covid-lockdown-protest-xinjiang/。

83 Minxin Pei, "The Sudden End of Zero-Covid: An Investigation," China Leadership Monitor, no. 75 (2023), https://www.prcleader.org/post/the-sudden-end-of-zero-covid-an-investigation.

83 裴敏欣，《新冠疫情零感染的突然终结：一项调查》，《中国领导力观察》，第75期（2023年），https://www.prcleader.org/post/the-sudden-end-of-zero-covid-an-investigation。

84 Gerard DiPippo, "China's Economy After Covid-19," China Leadership Monitor, no. 76 (2023), https://www.prcleader.org/post/china-s-economy-after-covid-19.

84 Gerard DiPippo，“新冠疫情后的中国经济”，《中国领导力观察》，第 76 期（2023 年），https://www.prcleader.org/post/china-s-economy-after-covid-19。





Chapter 7. End of the Chinese Economic Miracle





第七章 中国经济奇迹的终结


1 The World Bank and the Development Research Center of the State Council, China 2030: Building a Modern, Harmonious, and Creative Society (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2013).

1 世界银行和国务院发展研究中心，《中国2030：建设现代化、和谐、创新型社会》（华盛顿特区：世界银行，2013年）。

2 ZGTJNJ 2013 (Beijing: Zhongguo tongji chubanshe, 2013), https://www.stats.gov.cn/sj/ndsj/2013/indexch.htm.

2 ZGTJNJ 2013 (Beijing: Zhongguo tongji chubanshe, 2013), https://www.stats.gov.cn/sj/ndsj/2013/indexch.htm.

3 Lant Pritchett and Lawrence Summers, "Asiaphoria Meets Regression to the Mean," The Digest (National Bureau for Economic Research), no. 3 (March 2015), https://www.nber.org/digest/mar15/asiaphoria-meets-regression-mean.

3 Lant Pritchett 和 Lawrence Summers，“亚洲狂热与均值回归”，《摘要》（国家经济研究局），第 3 期（2015 年 3 月），https://www.nber.org/digest/mar15/asiaphoria-meets-regression-mean。

4 ZGTJNJ 2013.

4 OGTJNJ 2013。

5 Bank of International Settlements, https://www.bis.org/statistics/totcredit.htm.

5 国际清算银行，https://www.bis.org/statistics/totcredit.htm。

6 ZGTJNJ 2004 (Beijing: Zhongguo tongji chubanshe, 2004), https://www.stats.gov.cn/sj/ndsj/yb2004-c/indexch.htm; ZGTJNJ 2013.

6 ZGTJNJ 2004 (Beijing: Zhongguo tongji chubanshe, 2004), https://www.stats.gov.cn/sj/ndsj/yb2004-c/indexch.htm; ZGTJNJ 2013.

7 U.S. Census Bureau, "Trade in Goods with China," https://www.census.gov/foreign-trade/balance/c5700.html#2003.

7 美国人口普查局，“与中国的货物贸易”，https://www.census.gov/foreign-trade/balance/c5700.html#2003。

8 World Integrated Trade Solution, "European Union Trade Balance, Exports and Imports by Country 2003," https://wits.worldbank.org/CountryProfile/en/Country/EUN/Year/2003/TradeFlow/EXPIMP/Partner/by-country; data for 2012 are converted from Euros. Eurostat, "China-EU—International Trade in Goods Statistics," February 2023, https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php?title=China-EU__international_trade_in_goods_statistics#:~:text=Between%20January%202021%20and%20December,EU%20countries%20increased%20by%2028.8%20%25.

8 世界综合贸易解决方案，“2003年欧盟各国贸易平衡、进出口”，https://wits.worldbank.org/CountryProfile/en/Country/EUN/Year/2003/TradeFlow/EXPIMP/Partner/by-country；2012年的数据由欧元转换而来。欧盟统计局，“中国-欧盟——国际货物贸易统计”，2023年2月，https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php?title=China-EU__international_trade_in_goods_statistics#:~:text=Between%20January%202021%20and%20December,EU%20countries%20increased%20by%2028.8%20%25。

9 David Autor et al., "Importing Political Polarization? The Electoral Consequences of Rising Trade Exposure," American Economic Review 110, no. 10 (2020): 3139-83.

9 David Autor 等人，“进口政治极化？贸易风险增加的选举后果”，《美国经济评论》110，第 10 期（2020 年）：3139-83。

10 ZGTJNJ 2003 (Beijing: Zhongguo tongji chubanshe, 2003), 154; ZGTJNJ 2013.

10 ZGTJNJ 2003 (Beijing: Zhongguo tongji chubanshe, 2003), 154; ZGTJNJ 2013.

11 ZGTJNJ 2022.

11 ZGTJNJ 2022。

12 Shang-Jin Wei, Zhuan Xie, and Xiaobo Zhang, "From 'Made in China' to 'Innovated in China': Necessity, Prospect, and Challenges," Journal of Economic Perspectives 31, no. 1 (2017): 56-57; Harry Wu, "Sustainability of China's Growth Model: A Productivity Perspective," China and World Economy 24, no. 5 (2016): 51.

12 魏尚进、谢专、张晓波，“从‘中国制造’到‘中国创新’：必要性、前景和挑战”，《经济展望杂志》31，第1期（2017）：56-57；吴哈里，“中国增长模式的可持续性：生产率视角”，《中国与世界经济》24，第5期（2016）：51。

13 “中共中央关于全面深化改革若干重大问题的决定”[Decision of the CCP Central Committee on some major issues concerning comprehensively deepening the reform], 中国经济网 [China economic net], November 18, 2013, http://www.ce.cn/xwzx/gnsz/szyw/201311/18/t20131118 1767104.shtml.

13 “中共中央关于全面深化改革若干重大问题的决定”[Decision of the CCP Central Committee on some major issues concerning comprehensively deepening the reform], 中国经济网 [China economic net], November 18, 2013, http://www.ce.cn/xwzx/gnsz/szyw/201311/18/t20131118 1767104.shtml.

14 Nicholas Lardy, The State Strikes Back: The End of Economic Reform in China? (Washington, DC: Peterson Institute for International Economics, 2019).

14 Nicholas Lardy，《国家反击：中国经济改革的终结？》（华盛顿特区：彼得森国际经济研究所，2019 年）。

15 Liu Qiong, “习近平主持召开中央财经领导小组第十一次会议” [Xi Jinping presides over the 11th meeting of the Central Financial and Economic Leading Group], 新华网 [New China News Agency], November 10, 2015, https://www.xinhuanet.com/politics/2015-11/10/c_1117099915.htm.

15 Liu Qiong, “习近平主持召开中央财经领导小组第十一次会议” [Xi Jinping presides over the 11th meeting of the Central Financial and Economic Leading Group], 新华网 [New China News Agency], November 10, 2015, https://www.xinhuanet.com/politics/2015-11/10/c_1117099915.htm.

16 Yongmei Liang, Minjie Dong, and Qizi Zhang, "China's Industrial Capacity Utilization: Sectoral Comparison, Regional Differences and Determinants," China Economist (Beijing) 11, no. 2 (2016): 109-25; Wing Thye Woo, "China's Soft Budget Constraint on the Demand-Side Undermines Its Supply-Side Structural Reforms," China Economic Review, no. 57 (2019): 101-11.

16 Yongmei Liang, Minjie Dong, and Qizi Zhang, "中国工业产能利用率：部门比较、区域差异和决定因素", 中国经济学家（北京）11, no. 2 (2016): 109-25; Wing Thye Woo, "中国需求侧的软预算约束削弱了其供给侧结构性改革", 中国经济评论, no. 57 (2019): 101-11。

17 “国务院关于钢铁行业化解过剩产能实现脱困发展的意见” [Opinions of the State Council on resolving excess production capacity and achieving development out of the difficulties in the steel industry], 中华人民共和国中央人民政府 [Central People's Government], February 4, 2016, https://www.gov.cn/zhengce/content/2016-02/04/content_5039353.htm.

17 “国务院关于钢铁行业化解过剩产能实现脱困发展的意见” [Opinions of the State Council on resolving excess production capacity and achieving development out of the difficulties in the steel industry], 中华人民共和国中央人民政府 [Central People's Government], February 4, 2016, https://www.gov.cn/zhengce/content/2016-02/04/content_5039353.htm.

18 Huang Hanquan, “八字方针”为供给侧结构性改革定向指航” [The “eight-character policy” guides the supply-side structural reform], 中华人民共和国中央人民政府 [Central People's Government], December 28, 2018, https://www.gov.cn/zhengce/2018-12/28/content_5352861.htm.

18 Huang Hanquan, “八字方针”为供给侧结构性改革定向指航” [The “eight-character policy” guides the supply-side structural reform], 中华人民共和国中央人民政府 [Central People's Government], December 28, 2018, https://www.gov.cn/zhengce/2018-12/28/content_5352861.htm.

19 ZGTJNJ 2016 (Beijing: Zhongguo tongji chubanshe, 2016), https://www.stats.gov.cn/sj/ndsj/2016/indexch.htm; ZGTJNJ 2021 (Beijing: Zhongguo tongji chubanshe, 2021), https://www.stats.gov.cn/sj/ndsj/2021/indexch.htm.

19 ZGTJNJ 2016 (Beijing: Zhongguo tongji chubanshe, 2016), https://www.stats.gov.cn/sj/ndsj/2016/indexch.htm; ZGTJNJ 2021 (Beijing: Zhongguo tongji chubanshe, 2021), https://www.stats.gov.cn/sj/ndsj/2021/indexch.htm.

20 Bank of International Settlements, https://www.bis.org/statistics/totcredit.htm.

20 国际清算银行，https://www.bis.org/statistics/totcredit.htm。

21 Ouyang Hui and Ye Dongyan, “地方债狂奔” [Local debt is running wild], 中国改革 [China reform], no. 1 (2019), https://cnreform.caixin.com/2019-01-18/101371282.html/; Zhiwu Chen, “China's Dangerous Debt,” Foreign Affairs 94, no. 3 (2015): 13-18.

21 Ouyang Hui and Ye Dongyan, “地方债狂奔” [Local debt is running wild], 中国改革 [China reform], no. 1 (2019), https://cnreform.caixin.com/2019-01-18/101371282.html/; Zhiwu Chen, “China's Dangerous Debt,” Foreign Affairs 94, no. 3 (2015): 13-18.

22 Zhao Wei and Hou Qiannan, “地方财政土地依赖困局待解” [The fiscal dilemma of local land dependence must be solved], 中国改革 [China reform], no. 6 (2022), https://cnreform.caixin.com/2022-11-03/101959785.html; Chen, “China's Dangerous Debt.”

22 Zhao Wei and Hou Qiannan, “地方财政土地依赖困局待解” [The fiscal dilemma of local land dependence must be solved], 中国改革 [China reform], no. 6 (2022), https://cnreform.caixin.com/2022-11-03/101959785.html; Chen, “China's Dangerous Debt.”

23 Yu Hairong and Wang Xiaoxia, “地方启动去杠杆” [Local authorities initiate deleveraging], 财新周刊 [Caixin weekly], no. 10 (2018), https://weekly.caixin.com/2018-03-09/101219173.html; Xing Yun, “地方举债天花板” [Local debt ceiling], 财新周刊 [Caixin weekly], no. 35 (2015), https://weekly.caixin.com/2015-09-04/100846422.html; Zhou Xuan et al., “地方化债如何共克时限” [How to jointly overcome the time limit for local debt], 财新周刊 [Caixin weekly], no. 11 (2019), https://weekly.caixin.com/2019-03-23/101395961.html; Cheng Siwei and Wang Juanjuan, “地方隐形债务化解分步走” [Gradual steps to resolve local invisible debt], 财新周刊 [Caixin weekly], no. 47 (2021), https://weekly.caixin.com/2021-12-04/101813651.html; ZGTJNJ 2022.

23 Yu Hairong and Wang Xiaoxia, “地方启动去杠杆” [Local authorities initiate deleveraging], 财新周刊 [Caixin weekly], no. 10 (2018), https://weekly.caixin.com/2018-03-09/101219173.html; Xing Yun, “地方举债天花板” [Local debt ceiling], 财新周刊 [Caixin weekly], no. 35 (2015), https://weekly.caixin.com/2015-09-04/100846422.html; Zhou Xuan et al., “地方化债如何共克时限” [How to jointly overcome the time limit for local debt], 财新周刊 [Caixin weekly], no. 11 (2019), https://weekly.caixin.com/2019-03-23/101395961.html; Cheng Siwei and Wang Juanjuan, “地方隐形债务化解分步走” [Gradual steps to resolve local invisible debt], 财新周刊 [Caixin weekly], no. 47 (2021), https://weekly.caixin.com/2021-12-04/101813651.html; ZGTJNJ 2022.

24 Wu Hong Yuran and Zhang Yuzhe, “去杠杆加速”[Deleveraging accelerates], 财新周刊 [Caixin weekly], no. 40 (2016), https://topics.caixin.com/qugangganjiasudu/; ZGTJNJ 2016; Terrence Chan, Eunice Tan, and Christine Ip, “China's SOEs Are Stuck in a Debt Trap,” S&P Global Ratings, September 20, 2022, https://www.spglobal.com/_assets/documents/ratings/research/global-debt-leverage-1.pdf.

24 Wu Hong Yuran and Zhang Yuzhe, “去杠杆加速”[Deleveraging accelerates], 财新周刊 [Caixin weekly], no. 40 (2016), https://topics.caixin.com/qugangganjiasudu/; ZGTJNJ 2016; Terrence Chan, Eunice Tan, and Christine Ip, “China's SOEs Are Stuck in a Debt Trap,” S&P Global Ratings, September 20, 2022, https://www.spglobal.com/_assets/documents/ratings/research/global-debt-leverage-1.pdf.

25 Chen Changhua, “去杠杆任重道远” [Deleveraging has a long way to go], 财新周刊 [Caixin weekly], no. 1 (2020), https://weekly.caixin.com/2020-01-03/101500944.html.

25 Chen Changhua, “去杠杆任重道远” [Deleveraging has a long way to go], 财新周刊 [Caixin weekly], no. 1 (2020), https://weekly.caixin.com/2020-01-03/101500944.html.

26 Gao Shanwen, “去杠杆之争” [The debate over deleveraging], 金融四十人论坛 [Finance forty forum], July 5, 2018, http://www.cf40.com/news_detail/8074.html.

26 Gao Shanwen, “去杠杆之争” [The debate over deleveraging], 金融四十人论坛 [Finance forty forum], July 5, 2018, http://www.cf40.com/news_detail/8074.html.

27 At the end of 2017, nonfinancial SOEs faced 118.5 trillion yuan in outstanding debt, compared with 108 trillion yuan at the end of 2015. Margit Molnar and Jiangyuan Lu, "State-Owned Firms Behind China's Corporate Debt," OECD Economics Department, Working Paper no. 1536 (2019): 16.

27 截至 2017 年底，非金融国有企业未偿债务达 118.5 万亿元人民币，而 2015 年底为 108 万亿元人民币。Margit Molnar 和 Jiangyuan Lu，“中国企业债务背后的国有企业”，经合组织经济部工作论文第 1536 号（2019 年）：16。

28 Wu Hong Yuran and Wu Xiaomeng, “去杠杆变稳杠杆之后” [After deleveraging and stabilizing leverage], 财新周刊 [Caixin weekly], no. 8 (2019), https://weekly.caixin.com/2019-03-02/101386270.html.

28 Wu Hong Yuran and Wu Xiaomeng, “去杠杆变稳杠杆之后” [After deleveraging and stabilizing leverage], 财新周刊 [Caixin weekly], no. 8 (2019), https://weekly.caixin.com/2019-03-02/101386270.html.

29 Bank of International Settlements, https://www.bis.org/statistics/totcredit.htm.

29 国际清算银行，https://www.bis.org/statistics/totcredit.htm。

30 ZGTJNJ 2013 (Beijing: Zhongguo tongji chubanshe, 2013), https://www.stats.gov.cn/sj/ndsj/2013/indexch.htm.

30 ZGTJNJ 2013 (Beijing: Zhongguo tongji chubanshe, 2013), https://www.stats.gov.cn/sj/ndsj/2013/indexch.htm.

31 Jie Yunliang, “起底历次房地产调控” [Investigating the history of real estate regulation], 民生证券 [Minsheng securities], March 15, 2021, https://pdf.dfcfw.com/pdf/H3_AP202103151472037194_1.pdf?1615839137000.pdf.

31 Jie Yunliang, “起底历次房地产调控” [Investigating the history of real estate regulation], 民生证券 [Minsheng securities], March 15, 2021, https://pdf.dfcfw.com/pdf/H3_AP202103151472037194_1.pdf?1615839137000.pdf.

32 Kenneth Rogoff and Yuanchen Yang, "Peak China Housing," National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 27697, (August 2020); Edward Glaeser et al., "A Real Estate Boom with Chinese Characteristics," Journal of Economic Perspectives 31, no. 1 (2017): 93-116.

32 Kenneth Rogoff 和 Yuanchen Yang，“中国住房峰值”，美国国家经济研究局工作论文 27697，（2020 年 8 月）；Edward Glaeser 等人，“具有中国特色的房地产繁荣”，《经济展望杂志》31，第 1 期（2017 年）：93-116。

33 Simon Zhao et al., "How Big Is China's Real Estate Bubble and Why Hasn't It Burst Yet?", Land Use Policy, no. 64 (2017): 153-62.

33 赵西蒙等，“中国的房地产泡沫有多大，为什么还没有破裂？”，土地利用政策，第64期（2017年）：153-62。

34 “背景资料：中国政府2017年出台的房地产主要政策一览”[Background: Overview of the main real estate policies introduced by the Chinese government in 2017], Reuters, September 13, 2017, https://www.reuters.com/article/idUSL4S1LU3F1/.

34 “背景资料：中国政府2017年出台的房地产主要政策一览”[Background: Overview of the main real estate policies introduced by the Chinese government in 2017], Reuters, September 13, 2017, https://www.reuters.com/article/idUSL4S1LU3F1/.

35 ZGTJNJ 2020.

35 OGTJNJ 2020。

36 Arendse Huld, "What's Going on in China's Property Market?", China Briefing, January 14, 2022, https://www.china-briefing.com/news/explainer-whats-going-on-in-chinas-property-market/.

36 Arendse Huld，“中国房地产市场发生了什么？”，《中国简报》，2022 年 1 月 14 日，https://www.china-briefing.com/news/explainer-whats-going-on-in-chinas-property-market/。

37 Wu Hong Yuran and Wang Jing, “房企降杠杆开始” [Real estate companies begin to reduce leverage], 财新周刊 [Caixin weekly], no. 37 (2020), https://weekly.caixin.com/2020-09-19/101607114.html.

37 Wu Hong Yuran and Wang Jing, “房企降杠杆开始” [Real estate companies begin to reduce leverage], 财新周刊 [Caixin weekly], no. 37 (2020), https://weekly.caixin.com/2020-09-19/101607114.html.

38 ZGTJNJ 2024, https://www.stats.gov.cn/sj/ndsj/; Li Fang, “统计局：2021年全国商品房销售额181930亿元，增长4.8%” [Bureau of Statistics: National commercial housing sales in 2021 will be 18.193 billion yuan, an increase of 4.8%], 中国经济网 [China economic net], January 17, 2022, http://www.ce.cn/cysc/fdc/fc/202201/17/t20220117_37263309.shtml.

38 ZGTJNJ 2024, https://www.stats.gov.cn/sj/ndsj/; Li Fang, “统计局：2021年全国商品房销售额181930亿元，增长4.8%” [Bureau of Statistics: National commercial housing sales in 2021 will be 18.193 billion yuan, an increase of 4.8%], 中国经济网 [China economic net], January 17, 2022, http://www.ce.cn/cysc/fdc/fc/202201/17/t20220117_37263309.shtml.

39 Clare Jim and Samuel Shen, "Embattled Evergrande Warns of Growing Default Risks as Pressures Mount," Reuters, September 14, 2021, https://www.reuters.com/business/china-evergrande-warns-further-property-sales-drop-liquidity-crunch-2021-09-14/.

39 Clare Jim 和 Samuel Shen，“陷入困境的恒大警告称，随着压力不断增加，违约风险也在增加”，路透社，2021 年 9 月 14 日，https://www.reuters.com/business/china-evergrande-warns-further-property-sales-drop-liquidity-crunch-2021-09-14/。

40 “国家统计局：2022年全国房地产开发投资同比下降10%”[National Bureau of Statistics: National real estate development investment will drop by 10% year-on-year in 2022], 上海证券报 [Shanghai securities news], January 17, 2023, https://news.cnstock.com/news,bwkx-202301-5007276.htm.

40 “国家统计局：2022年全国房地产开发投资同比下降10%”[National Bureau of Statistics: National real estate development investment will drop by 10% year-on-year in 2022], 上海证券报 [Shanghai securities news], January 17, 2023, https://news.cnstock.com/news,bwkx-202301-5007276.htm.

41 "Debt Crisis Threatens to Engulf China's Surviving Developers," Bloomberg, September 5, 2023, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2023-09-04/debt-crisis-threatens-to-engulf-china-s-surviving-developers.

41 “债务危机威胁吞噬中国幸存的开发商”，彭博社，2023 年 9 月 5 日，https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2023-09-04/debt-crisis-threatens-to-engulf-china-s-surviving-developers。

42 "China's Bursting Housing Bubble Is Doing More Damage than Official Data Suggest," Bloomberg, August 17, 2018, https://fortune.com/2023/08/17/china-home-sales-worse-than-official-data-real-estate-crisis/.

42 “中国房地产泡沫破裂造成的损害比官方数据显示的更大”，彭博社，2018 年 8 月 17 日，https://fortune.com/2023/08/17/china-home-sales-worse-than-official-data-real-estate-crisis/。

43 Liangping Gao and Ryan Woo, "China's Falling Property Sales, Investment Weigh on Recovery," Reuters, October 17, 2023, https://www.reuters.com/world/china/chinas-falling-property-sales-investment-weigh-recovery-2023-10-18/; ZGTJNJ 2024, https://www.stats.gov.cn/sj/ndsj/.

43 Liangping Gao 和 Ryan Woo，“中国房地产销售和投资下滑拖累经济复苏”，路透社，2023 年 10 月 17 日，https://www.reuters.com/world/china/chinas-falling-property-sales-investment-weigh-recovery-2023-10-18/；ZGTJNJ 2024，https://www.stats.gov.cn/sj/ndsj/。

44 “China's Easing of "Three Red Lines' Loan Rules for Property Sector Won't Have Immediate Impact on Struggling Developers, Analysts Say," South China Morning Post, January 7, 2022, https://www.scmp.com/business/china-business/article/3162592/chinas-easing-three-red-lines-loan-rules-property-sector; "8城全面取消限购9月以来已有超30省市优化楼市政策" [Eight cities have completely canceled purchase restrictions. Since September, more than 30 provinces and cities have optimized property market policies], 澎湃新闻 [The paper], September 12, 2023, https://news.cctv.com/2023/09/12/ARTINIFfRaO8Sn8Daysc4ql3s230912.shtml.

44 “China's Easing of "Three Red Lines' Loan Rules for Property Sector Won't Have Immediate Impact on Struggling Developers, Analysts Say," South China Morning Post, January 7, 2022, https://www.scmp.com/business/china-business/article/3162592/chinas-easing-three-red-lines-loan-rules-property-sector; "8城全面取消限购9月以来已有超30省市优化楼市政策" [Eight cities have completely canceled purchase restrictions. Since September, more than 30 provinces and cities have optimized property market policies], 澎湃新闻 [The paper], September 12, 2023, https://news.cctv.com/2023/09/12/ARTINIFfRaO8Sn8Daysc4ql3s230912.shtml.

45 "China's Property Sector Set to Be Persistently Weak for Years, Goldman Sachs Says," Reuters, June 12, 2023, https://www.reuters.com/world/china/chinas-property-sector-set-be-persistently-weak-years-goldman-2023-06-12/.

45 “高盛称中国房地产行业将持续疲软多年”，路透社，2023年6月12日，https://www.reuters.com/world/china/chinas-property-sector-set-be-persistently-weak-years-goldman-2023-06-12/。

46 US Census Bureau, "Trade in Goods with China," https://www.census.gov/foreign-trade/balance/c5700.html#2016.

46 美国人口普查局，“与中国的货物贸易”，https://www.census.gov/foreign-trade/balance/c5700.html#2016。

47 Nick Gass, "Trump: 'We Can't Continue to Allow China to Rape Our Country," Politico, May 2, 2016, https://www.politico.com/blogs/2016-gop-primary-live-updates-and-results/2016/05/trump-china-rape-america-222689.

47 Nick Gass，“特朗普：‘我们不能继续允许中国强奸我们的国家’”，Politico，2016 年 5 月 2 日，https://www.politico.com/blogs/2016-gop-primary-live-updates-and-results/2016/05/trump-china-rape-america-222689。

48 Bob Davis and Lingling Wei, Superpower Showdown: How the Battle Between Trump and Xi Threatens a New Cold War (New York: Harper Business, 2020).

48 Bob Davis 和 Lingling Wei，《超级大国对决：特朗普与习近平之间的斗争如何威胁到一场新的冷战》（纽约：哈珀商业出版社，2020 年）。

49 Chad Bown, "China Bought None of the Extra $200 Billion of US Exports in Trump's Trade Deal," Peterson Institute for International Economics, July 19, 2022, https://www.piee.com/blogs/realtime-economics/china-bought-none-extra-200-billion-us-exports-trumps-trade-deal.

49 Chad Bown，“中国没有购买特朗普贸易协议中额外 2000 亿美元的美国出口商品”，彼得森国际经济研究所，2022 年 7 月 19 日，https://www.piee.com/blogs/realtime-economics/china-bought-none-extra-200-billion-us-exports-trumps-trade-deal。

50 For a chronology of the trade war, visit https://www.china-briefing.com/news/the-us-china-trade-war-a-timeline/.

50 有关贸易战的时间线，请访问 https://www.china-briefing.com/news/the-us-china-trade-war-a-timeline/。

51 ZGTJNJ 2022.

51 ZGTJNJ 2022。

52 World Bank, "GDP Growth (Annual %)—United States," https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.KD.ZG?locations=US.

52 世界银行，“GDP 增长率（年百分比）—美国”，https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.KD.ZG?locations=US。

53 Bablo Fajgelbaum and Amit Khandelwal, "The Economic Impacts of the US–China Trade War," Annual Review of Economics, no. 14 (2022): 205–28.

53 Bablo Fajgelbaum 和 Amit Khandelwal，“美中贸易战的经济影响”，《经济学年鉴》，第 14 期（2022 年）：205-28。

54 ZGTJNJ 2022.

54 ZGTJNJ 2022。

55 Sanjoy Kumar Paul, Md. Abdul Moktadir, and Kamrul Ahsan, "Key Supply Chain Strategies for the Post-COVID-19 Era: Implications for Resilience and Sustainability," International Journal of Logistics Management 34, no. 4 (2023): 1165-87.

55 Sanjoy Kumar Paul、Md. Abdul Moktadir 和 Kamrul Ahsan，“后 COVID-19 时代的关键供应链战略：对韧性和可持续性的影响”，《国际物流管理杂志》34，第 4 期（2023 年）：1165-87。

56 Janne Leino, "Walking on Eggshells: The Twin Transition and Europe's Quest to De-Risk from China," European View 22, no.1 (2023), https://doi.org/10.1177/17816858231206010.

56 Janne Leino，“如履薄冰：双重转型与欧洲降低对华风险的努力”，《欧洲视角》22，第1期（2023年），https://doi.org/10.1177/17816858231206010。

57 ZJTJNJ 2024, https://www.stats.gov.cn/sj/ndsj/2024/indexch.htm; US Census Bureau, "Trade in Goods with China," https://www.census.gov/foreign-trade/balance/c5700.html.

57 ZJTJNJ 2024，https://www.stats.gov.cn/sj/ndsj/2024/indexch.htm；美国人口普查局，“与中国的货物贸易”，https://www.census.gov/foreign-trade/balance/c5700.html。

58 Noah Barkin, "Export Controls and the US-China Tech War," MERICS China Monitor, no. 18 (2020), https://merics.org/sites/default/files/2020-04/merics_ChinaMonitor_US-CH-EU-Export%20Controls_en_final.pdf.

58 Noah Barkin，“出口管制与美中科技战”，MERICS 中国观察，第 18 期（2020 年），https://merics.org/sites/default/files/2020-04/merics_ChinaMonitor_US-CH-EU-Export%20Controls_en_final.pdf。

59 Xu Weibing, “如何理解‘国内大循环’国内国际双循环”[How to understand ‘domestic circulation’ and domestic-international dual circulation], 中国经济时报 [China economic times], August 13, 2020, https://www.sohu.com/a/412838402_115495; Wang Zihui, “看习近平这几次重要讲话，弄懂‘大循环’双循环”[Read these important articles by Xi Jinping to understand “domestic circulation” and domestic-international dual circulation], 新华网 [New China News Agency], September 5, 2020, http://www.xinhuanet.com/politics/xxjxs/2020-09/05/c_1126455277.htm.

59 Xu Weibing, “如何理解‘国内大循环’国内国际双循环”[How to understand ‘domestic circulation’ and domestic-international dual circulation], 中国经济时报 [China economic times], August 13, 2020, https://www.sohu.com/a/412838402_115495; Wang Zihui, “看习近平这几次重要讲话，弄懂‘大循环’双循环”[Read these important articles by Xi Jinping to understand “domestic circulation” and domestic-international dual circulation], 新华网 [New China News Agency], September 5, 2020, http://www.xinhuanet.com/politics/xxjxs/2020-09/05/c_1126455277.htm.

60 “中共中央关于制定国民经济和社会发展第十四个五年规划和二三五年远景目标的建议”[Proposal of the CCP Central Committee on formulating the 14th Five-Year Plan for National Economic and Social Development and the long-term goals for 2035],中华人民共和国中央人民政府 [Central People's Government], October 29, 2020, https://www.gov.cn/zhengce/2020-11/03/content_5556991.htm.

60 “中共中央关于制定国民经济和社会发展第十四个五年规划和二三五年远景目标的建议”[Proposal of the CCP Central Committee on formulating the 14th Five-Year Plan for National Economic and Social Development and the long-term goals for 2035],中华人民共和国中央人民政府 [Central People's Government], October 29, 2020, https://www.gov.cn/zhengce/2020-11/03/content_5556991.htm.

61 Xi Jinping, “关于‘中共中央关于制定国民经济和社会发展第十四个五年规划和二〇三五年远景目标的建议’的说明” [Explanation of the “Proposal of the Central Committee on Formulating the 14th Five-Year Plan for National Economic and Social Development and Long-term Goals for 2035”], 中华人民共和国中央人民政府 [Central People's Government of the PRC], November 3, 2020, http://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2020-11/03/content_5556997.htm.

61 Xi Jinping, “关于‘中共中央关于制定国民经济和社会发展第十四个五年规划和二〇三五年远景目标的建议’的说明” [Explanation of the “Proposal of the Central Committee on Formulating the 14th Five-Year Plan for National Economic and Social Development and Long-term Goals for 2035”], 中华人民共和国中央人民政府 [Central People's Government of the PRC], November 3, 2020, http://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2020-11/03/content_5556997.htm.

62 Xi Jinping, “关于‘中共中央关于制定国民经济和社会发展第十四个五年规划和二〇三五年远景目的建议’的说明”; Liu He, “加快构建以国内大循环为主体、国内国际双循环相互促进的新发展格局” [Accelerate the establishment of a new development pattern with domestic circulation as the main focus and mutually reinforcing dual circulation of domestic and international markets], 人民日报 [People's daily], November 25, 2020, 6, http://www.xinhuanet.com/politics/2020-11/25/c_1126785254.htm.

62 Xi Jinping, “关于‘中共中央关于制定国民经济和社会发展第十四个五年规划和二〇三五年远景目的建议’的说明”; Liu He, “加快构建以国内大循环为主体、国内国际双循环相互促进的新发展格局” [Accelerate the establishment of a new development pattern with domestic circulation as the main focus and mutually reinforcing dual circulation of domestic and international markets], 人民日报 [People's daily], November 25, 2020, 6, http://www.xinhuanet.com/politics/2020-11/25/c_1126785254.htm.

63 Xi Jinping, “国家中长期经济社会发展战略若干重大问题” [Several major issues in the national medium and long-term economic and social development strategy], 新华网 [New China News Agency], October 31, 2020, http://www.xinhuanet.com/politics/leaders/2020-10/31/c_1126681658.htm.

63 Xi Jinping, “国家中长期经济社会发展战略若干重大问题” [Several major issues in the national medium and long-term economic and social development strategy], 新华网 [New China News Agency], October 31, 2020, http://www.xinhuanet.com/politics/leaders/2020-10/31/c_1126681658.htm.

64 “中共中央关于制定国民经济和社会发展第十四个五年规划和二三五年远景目标的建议”

64 “中共中央关于制定国民经济和社会发展第十四个五年规划和二三五年远景目标的建议”

65 Xi Jinping, “关于《中共中央关于制定国民经济和社会发展第十四个五年规划和二〇三五年远景目的建议》的说明.”

65 Xi Jinping, “关于《中共中央关于制定国民经济和社会发展第十四个五年规划和二〇三五年远景目的建议》的说明.”

66 “中共中央关于制定国民经济和社会发展第四个五年规划和二三五年远景目标的建议”

66 “中共中央关于制定国民经济和社会发展第四个五年规划和二三五年远景目标的建议”

67 Alicia Garcia-Herrero, "What Is Behind China's Dual Circulation Strategy," China Leadership Monitor, no. 69 (2021), https://www.prcleader.org/post/what-is-behind-china-s-dual-circulation-strategy.

67 Alicia Garcia-Herrero，“中国双循环战略背后的原因是什么”，《中国领导力观察》，第 69 期（2021 年），https://www.prcleader.org/post/what-is-behind-china-s-dual-circulation-strategy。

68 Julie Zhu et al., "China to Launch $40 Billion State Fund to Boost Chip Industry," Reuters, September 5, 2023, https://www.reuters.com/technology/china-launch-new-40-bln-state-fund-boost-chip-industry-sources-say-2023-09-05/.

68 Julie Zhu 等人，“中国将启动 400 亿美元的国家基金以促进芯片产业发展”，路透社，2023 年 9 月 5 日，https://www.reuters.com/technology/china-launch-new-40-bln-state-fund-boost-chip-industry-sources-say-2023-09-05/。

69 "China Is Trying to Protect Its Economy from Western Pressure," Economist, May 26, 2022, https://www.economist.com/briefing/2022/05/26/china-is-trying-to-protect-its-economy-from-western-pressure.

69 “中国正努力保护其经济免受西方压力”，《经济学人》，2022 年 5 月 26 日，https://www.economist.com/briefing/2022/05/26/china-is-trying-to-protect-its-economy-from-western-pressure。

70 Asim Anand, "China's Quest for Food Security Is Bound to Be a Long Drawn Saga," S&P Global Community Insights, https://www.spglobal.com/commodityinsights/en/market-insights/blogs/agriculture/080923-chinas-quest-for-food-security-is-bound-to-be-a-long-drawn-saga.

70 Asim Anand，“中国寻求粮食安全注定是一场漫长的征程”，标普全球社区洞察，https://www.spglobal.com/commodityinsights/en/market-insights/blogs/agriculture/080923-chinas-quest-for-food-security-is-bound-to-be-a-long-drawn-saga。

71 Jun Du, Xiaoxuan Liu, and Ying Zhou. "State Advances and Private Sector Retreats? Evidence of Aggregate Productivity Decomposition in China," China Economic Review, no. 31 (2014): 459-74.

71 杜军、刘晓轩、周颖。“国家进步与私营部门退缩？中国总生产率分解的证据”，《中国经济评论》，第31期（2014年）：459-74。

72 Di Guo et al., "Political Economy of Private Firms in China," Journal of Comparative Economics 42, no. 2 (2014): 286-303.

72 Di Guo 等人，“中国私营企业的政治经济学”，比较经济学杂志 42，第 2 期（2014 年）：286-303。

73 Nicholas Lardy, Markets Over Mao: The Rise of Private Business in China (Washington, DC: Peterson Institute for International Economics, 2014).

73 Nicholas Lardy，《市场胜于毛泽东：中国私营企业的兴起》（华盛顿特区：彼得森国际经济研究所，2014 年）。

74 “陈志武：国进民退的五大后果”[Chen Zhiwu: Five major consequences of the country advancing and the people retreating], November 30, 2009, https://www.aisixiang.com/data/31019.html.

74 “陈志武：国进民退的五大后果”[Chen Zhiwu: Five major consequences of the country advancing and the people retreating], November 30, 2009, https://www.aisixiang.com/data/31019.html.

75 Sarah Eaton, The Advance of the State in Contemporary China: State-market Relations in the Reform Era (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2016).

75 Sarah Eaton，《当代中国国家的进步：改革时代的国家与市场关系》（纽约：剑桥大学出版社，2016 年）。

76 "Xi Jinping Millionaire Relations Reveal Elite Chinese Fortunes," Bloomberg, June 29, 2012, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2012-06-29/xi-jinping-millionaire-relations-reveal-fortunes-of-elite.

76 “习近平与百万富翁的关系揭示了中国精英阶层的财富”，彭博社，2012 年 6 月 29 日，https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2012-06-29/xi-jinping-millionaire-relations-reveal-fortunes-of-elite。

77 Yang Anqi, “习近平在全国国有企业党的建设工作会议上的讲话”[Xi Jinping's speech at the National Conference on Party Building in State-owned Enterprises], 中国经济网 [China economic net], November 18, 2013, https://www.12371.cn/special/xjpgqdjjh/.

77 Yang Anqi, “习近平在全国国有企业党的建设工作会议上的讲话”[Xi Jinping's speech at the National Conference on Party Building in State-owned Enterprises], 中国经济网 [China economic net], November 18, 2013, https://www.12371.cn/special/xjpgqdjjh/.

78 Daniel Koss, "Party Building as Institutional Bricolage: Asserting Authority at the Business Frontier," China Quarterly 248, no. S1 (2021): 222-43.

78 Daniel Koss，“党建作为制度拼凑：在商业前沿确立权威”，《中国季刊》248，第 S1 期（2021 年）：222-43。

79 Derek Levine, "Made in China 2025," Journal of Strategic Security 13, no. 3 (2020): 1-16; Max Zenglein and Anna Holzmann, "Evolving Made in China 2025," MERICS Papers on China, no. 8 (July 2019), https://merics.org/en/report/evolving-made-china-2025.

79 Derek Levine，“中国制造 2025”，战略安全杂志 13，第 3 期（2020 年）：1-16；Max Zenglein 和 Anna Holzmann，“演进中的中国制造 2025”，MERICS 中国论文，第 8 期（2019 年 7 月），https://merics.org/en/report/evolving-made-china-2025。

80 “国务院关于印发‘中国制造2025’的通知，”国发（2015）28号[Notice of the State Council on issuing “Made in China 2025”，Guofa（2015）no.28.

80 “国务院关于印发‘中国制造2025’的通知，”国发（2015）28号[Notice of the State Council on issuing “Made in China 2025”，Guofa（2015）no.28.

81 Lardy, The State Strikes Back, 86-89.

81 Lardy，《国家反击》，86-89。

82 Fanhua Zeng, Wei-Chiao Huang, and James Hueng, "On Chinese Government's Stock Market Rescue Efforts in 2015," Modern Economy 7, no. 4 (2016): 411-18.

82 曾凡华、黄伟桥、James Hueng，“论中国政府2015年的股市救助工作”，《现代经济》7，第4期（2016年）：411-18。

83 Nicholas Lardy, "China's Private Firms Continue to Struggle," Peterson Institute for International Economics, June 14, 2019, https://www.piie.com/blogs/china-economic-watch/chinas-private-firms-continue-struggle.

83 Nicholas Lardy，“中国的私营企业继续苦苦挣扎”，彼得森国际经济研究所，2019 年 6 月 14 日，https://www.piie.com/blogs/china-economic-watch/chinas-private-firms-continue-struggle。

84 Shi Lingling and Wang Mengmo, “中国民企融资环境报告：2020” [China private enterprise financing environment report: 2020], 中国智库网 [China think tank network], May 16, 2020, https://www.chinathinktanks.org.cn/content/detail/id/uspibe76.

84 Shi Lingling and Wang Mengmo, “中国民企融资环境报告：2020” [China private enterprise financing environment report: 2020], 中国智库网 [China think tank network], May 16, 2020, https://www.chinathinktanks.org.cn/content/detail/id/uspibe76.

85 ZGTJNJ, various years, e-book, https://www.stats.gov.cn/sj/ndsj/.

85 ZGTJNJ，各种年份，电子书，https://www.stats.gov.cn/sj/ndsj/。

86 Liu Guishi, “民间投资增速为何逐月放缓?” [Why is the growth rate of private investment slowing down month by month?], 经济观察网 [Economic observer network], November 8, 2022, https://finance.sina.cn/china/gncj/2022-11-08/detail-imqqsmrp5389469.d.html?vt=4&cid=76729&node_id=76729.

86 Liu Guishi, “民间投资增速为何逐月放缓?” [Why is the growth rate of private investment slowing down month by month?], 经济观察网 [Economic observer network], November 8, 2022, https://finance.sina.cn/china/gncj/2022-11-08/detail-imqqsmrp5389469.d.html?vt=4&cid=76729&node_id=76729.

87 ZGTJNJ 2022, e-book, https://www.stats.gov.cn/sj/ndsj/2022/indexch.htm.

87 ZGTJNJ 2022，电子书，https://www.stats.gov.cn/sj/ndsj/2022/indexch.htm。

88 Jing Yang and Lingling Wei, "China's President Xi Jinping Personally Scuttled Jack Ma's Ant IPO," Wall Street Journal, November 12, 2020, https://www.wsj.com/articles/china-president-xi-jinping-halted-jack-ma-ant-ipo-11605203556.

88 Jing Yang 和 Lingling Wei，“中国国家主席习近平亲自叫停了马云的蚂蚁集团IPO”，《华尔街日报》，2020年11月12日，https://www.wsj.com/articles/china-president-xi-jinping-halted-jack-ma-ant-ipo-11605203556。

89 Lingling Wei, "China Blocked Jack Ma's Ant IPO After Investigation Revealed Likely Beneficiaries," Wall Street Journal, February 16, 2021, https://www.wsj.com/articles/china-blocked-jack-mas-ant-ipo-after-an-investigation-revealed-who-stood-to-gain-11613491292.

89 凌玲，《中国在调查揭露潜在受益人后阻止了马云的蚂蚁集团IPO》，《华尔街日报》，2021年2月16日，https://www.wsj.com/articles/china-blocked-jack-mas-ant-ipo-after-an-investigation-revealed-who-stood-to-gain-11613491292。

90 Zhao Wenhan, “习近平在中共中央政治局第三十四次集体学习时强调把握数字经济发展趋势和规律推动我国数字经济健康发展”[At the 34th collective study session of the CCP Politburo Xi Jinping emphasizes that we should grasp the development trends and laws of the digital economy and promote the healthy development of our country's digital economy],新华网 [New China News Agency], October 19, 2021, http://www.news.cn/2021-10/19/c_1127973979.htm.

90 Zhao Wenhan, “习近平在中共中央政治局第三十四次集体学习时强调把握数字经济发展趋势和规律推动我国数字经济健康发展”[At the 34th collective study session of the CCP Politburo Xi Jinping emphasizes that we should grasp the development trends and laws of the digital economy and promote the healthy development of our country's digital economy],新华网 [New China News Agency], October 19, 2021, http://www.news.cn/2021-10/19/c_1127973979.htm.

91 Sandra Colino, "The Case Against Alibaba in China and Its Wider Policy Repercussions," Journal of Antitrust Enforcement 10, no. 1 (2022): 217-29.

91 Sandra Colino，“针对阿里巴巴在中国的案件及其更广泛的政策影响”，《反垄断执法杂志》10，第 1 期（2022 年）：217-29。

92 "Beijing's Regulatory Crackdown Wipes $ 1.1 Trillion off Chinese Big Tech," Reuters, July 12, 2023, https://www.reuters.com/technology/beijings-regulatory-crackdown-wipes-11-trln-off-chinese-big-tech-2023-07-12/.

92 “北京监管打击使中国大型科技公司市值蒸发 1.1 万亿美元”，路透社，2023 年 7 月 12 日，https://www.reuters.com/technology/beijings-regulatory-crackdown-wipes-11-trln-off-chinese-big-tech-2023-07-12/。

93 Haiyan Qian, Allan Walker, and Shuangye Chen, "The 'Double-Reduction' Education Policy in China: Three Prevailing Narratives," Journal of Education Policy, June 12, 2023, doi.org / 10.1080/02680939.2023.2222381.

93 Haiyan Qian、Allan Walker 和 Shuangye Chen，“中国的‘双减’教育政策：三种主流叙事”，《教育政策杂志》，2023 年 6 月 12 日，doi.org / 10.1080/02680939.2023.2222381。

94 "China's $100 Billion Tutoring Ban Backfires, Spawning Black Market," Bloomberg, July 23, 2023, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2023-07-20/china-s-tutoring-crackdown-sends-kids-to-underground-test-prep.

94 “中国1000亿美元的补习禁令适得其反，催生了黑市”，彭博社，2023年7月23日，https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2023-07-20/china-s-tutoring-crackdown-sends-kids-to-underground-test-prep。

95 ZGTJNJ 2020.

95 OGTJNJ 2020。

96 “半月谈：疫情下百万家店铺倒闭”[Bimonthly talk: Millions of stores close down during the epidemic], 澎湃新闻 [The paper], March 2, 2021, https://m.thepaper.cn/kuaibao_detail.jsp?contid=11517690&from=kuaibao; “森林聊创业:‘400万企业倒闭后’”[Talk on entrepreneurship: “After 4 million businesses failed”], 今日头条, May 6, 2022, https://www.toutiao.com/article/7094639845871501838/?wid=1702345628351.

96 “半月谈：疫情下百万家店铺倒闭”[Bimonthly talk: Millions of stores close down during the epidemic], 澎湃新闻 [The paper], March 2, 2021, https://m.thepaper.cn/kuaibao_detail.jsp?contid=11517690&from=kuaibao; “森林聊创业:‘400万企业倒闭后’”[Talk on entrepreneurship: “After 4 million businesses failed”], 今日头条, May 6, 2022, https://www.toutiao.com/article/7094639845871501838/?wid=1702345628351.

97 Nectar Gan and Shawn Deng, "Chinese Cities Rush to Lockdown in Show of Loyalty to Xi's 'Zero-Covid' Strategy," CNN, September 5, 2022, https://www.cnn.com/2022/09/05/china/china-covid-lockdown-74-cities-intl-hnk/index.html.

97 Nectar Gan 和 Shawn Deng，“中国城市迅速封锁，以示对习近平‘零新冠’战略的忠诚”，CNN，2022 年 9 月 5 日，https://www.cnn.com/2022/09/05/china/china-covid-lockdown-74-cities-intl-hnk/index.html。

98 Minxin Pei, "The Sudden End of Zero-Covid: An Investigation," China Leadership Monitor, no. 75 (2022), https://www.prcleader.org/post/the-sudden-end-of-zero-covid-an-investigation.

98 裴敏欣，《新冠疫情零感染的突然终结：一项调查》，《中国领导力观察》，第75期（2022年），https://www.prcleader.org/post/the-sudden-end-of-zero-covid-an-investigation。

99 Hong Xiao et al., "Excess All-Cause Mortality in China After Ending the Zero COVID Policy," JAMA Network Open 6, no. 8 (2023), https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamanetworkopen/fullarticle/2808734.

99 Hong Xiao 等人，“中国结束新冠零感染政策后全因死亡率超额”，JAMA Network Open 6，第 8 期（2023 年），https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamanetworkopen/fullarticle/2808734。

100 "COVID Data Tracker," CDC, https://covid.cdc.gov/covid-data-tracker/#datatracker-home.

100 “COVID 数据追踪器”，美国疾病控制与预防中心，https://covid.cdc.gov/covid-data-tracker/#datatracker-home。

101 Charmaine Jacob, "China to See the World's Biggest Millionaire Exodus This Year, New Study Shows," CNBC, June 15, 2023, https://www.cnbc.com/2023/06/15/china-to-see-the-worlds-biggest-millionaire-exodus-this-year-study-shows-.html.

101 Charmaine Jacob，“新研究显示，中国今年将迎来全球最大规模的百万富翁外流”，CNBC，2023 年 6 月 15 日，https://www.cnbc.com/2023/06/15/china-to-see-the-worlds-biggest-millionaire-exodus-this-year-study-shows-.html。

102 ZGTJNJ 2020.

102 OGTJNJ 2020。

103 Yiping Huang and Fang Cai, eds., Debating the Lewis Turning Point in China (New York: Routledge, 2016).

103 黄一平、蔡芳编，《论中国的刘易斯转折点》（纽约：Routledge出版社，2016年）。





Chapter 8. From Engagement to a New Cold War





第八章 从接触到新冷战


1 Andrew Walder, "Bending the Arc of Chinese History: The Cultural Revolution's Paradoxical Legacy," China Quarterly, no. 227 (2016): 613-31.

1 Andrew Walder，“改变中国历史的弧线：文化大革命的悖论遗产”，《中国季刊》，第 227 期（2016 年）：613-31。

2 "The Present Situation and the Tasks Before Us," January 16, 1980, Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping (1975-1982), 225.

2 《当前形势和我们面临的任务》，1980 年 1 月 16 日，邓小平选集（1975-1982 年），第 225 页。

3 Suisheng Zhao, The Dragon Roars Back: Transformational Leaders and Dynamics of Chinese Foreign Policy (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2023), 50-55.

3 赵穗生，《龙的咆哮：变革型领导人和中国外交政策的动态》（斯坦福，加州：斯坦福大学出版社，2023 年），50-55 页。

4 Patrick Tyler, "The (Ab)normalization of U.S.-Chinese Relations," Foreign Affairs 78, no. 5 (1999): 93-122.

4 Patrick Tyler，“美中关系的（非）正常化”，《外交事务》78，第5期（1999年）：93-122。

5 邓小平年谱 上册 [Deng Xiaoping chronology, vol. 1] (Beijing: Central Party Literature Publishing House, 2004), 313-14, 452-53.

5 邓小平年谱 上册 [Deng Xiaoping chronology, vol. 1] (Beijing: Central Party Literature Publishing House, 2004), 313-14, 452-53.

6 Ezra Vogel, Deng Xiaoping and the Transformation of China (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2011), 333-48.

6 Ezra Vogel，《邓小平与中国的转型》（马萨诸塞州剑桥：哈佛大学出版社，2011 年），第 333-48 页。

7 Tu Xinquan, Lu Yue, and Li Siqi, 70 年来的中美经贸关系 [Sino-American Economic and Trade Relations since 1970] (Beijing: 对外经济贸易大学中国, WTO研究院, 2019), 3.

7 Tu Xinquan, Lu Yue, and Li Siqi, 70 年来的中美经贸关系 [Sino-American Economic and Trade Relations since 1970] (Beijing: 对外经济贸易大学中国, WTO研究院, 2019), 3.

8 US Census Bureau, "Trade in Goods with China, 1989," https://www.census.gov/foreign-trade/balance/c5700.html#1989.

8 美国人口普查局，“1989 年与中国的货物贸易”，https://www.census.gov/foreign-trade/balance/c5700.html#1989。

9 "Most-Favored-Nation Status of the People's Republic of China," CRS Report for Congress, July 25, 2001, https://www.everycrsreport.com/files/20010725_RL30225_4f01c5c4b2d3e63f78fd6bf059bf534fc7cc3e6.pdf.

9 “中华人民共和国最惠国待遇”，国会研究服务处报告，2001 年 7 月 25 日，https://www.everycrsreport.com/files/20010725_RL30225_4f01c5c4b2d3e63f78fd6bf059bf534fc7cc3e6.pdf。

10 Jing-dong Yuan, "The Politics of the Strategic Triangle: The US, COCOM, and Export Controls on China, 1979-1989," Journal of Northeast Asian Studies 14, no. 1 (1995): 47-79; Larry Wortzel, "U.S. Technology Transfer Policies and the Modernization of China's Armed Forces," Asian Survey 27, no. 6 (1987): 615-37.

10 袁景东，《战略三角的政治：美国、联合司令部和对华出口管制，1979-1989》，《东北亚研究杂志》14，第1期（1995）：47-79；拉里·沃泽尔，《美国技术转让政策与中国军队现代化》，《亚洲调查》27，第6期（1987）：615-37。

11 Harry Harding, A Fragile Relationship: The United States and China Since 1972 (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution, 1992).

11 哈里·哈丁，《脆弱的关系：1972 年以来的美国与中国》（华盛顿特区：布鲁金斯学会，1992 年）。

12 Deng Xiaoping, 邓小平年谱上册, 368.

12 Deng Xiaoping, 邓小平年谱上册, 368.

13 Deng Xiaoping, 411-12.

13 Deng Xiaoping, 411-12.

14 Shinkichi Eto, "Recent Developments in Sino-Japanese Relations," Asian Survey 20, no. 7 (1980): 726-43.

14 江藤新吉，“中日关系的最新发展”，《亚洲研究》20，第7期（1980年）：726-43。

15 Reinhard Drifte, "The Ending of Japan's ODA Loan Programme to China—All's Well That Ends Well?," Asia-Pacific Review 13, no. 1 (2006): 94-117.

15 Reinhard Drifte，“日本对华 ODA 贷款计划的结束——结局圆满吗？”，亚太评论 13，第 1 期（2006 年）：94-117。

16 Wang Mingyuan, “中曾根康弘、胡耀邦与80年代中日关系蜜月期”[Nakasone, Hu Yao-bang and the honeymoon period of Sino-Japanese relations in the 198os], 财新网 [Caixin], November 3, 2019. https://opinion.caixin.com/m/2019-12-03/101490078.html.

16 Wang Mingyuan, “中曾根康弘、胡耀邦与80年代中日关系蜜月期”[Nakasone, Hu Yao-bang and the honeymoon period of Sino-Japanese relations in the 198os], 财新网 [Caixin], November 3, 2019. https://opinion.caixin.com/m/2019-12-03/101490078.html.

17 Wang Mingyuan.

17 Wang Mingyuan.

18 Ye Jia and Sun Wei, “部分中国青年代表团成员与日本友人在东京联欢” [Members of the Chinese Youth Delegation partying with Japanese friends in Tokyo], Xinhua, May 8, 2008, https://www.gov.cn/jrzg/2008-05/08/content_964285.htm.

18 Ye Jia and Sun Wei, “部分中国青年代表团成员与日本友人在东京联欢” [Members of the Chinese Youth Delegation partying with Japanese friends in Tokyo], Xinhua, May 8, 2008, https://www.gov.cn/jrzg/2008-05/08/content_964285.htm.

19 Yanzhong Huang et al., "China's Approach to Global Governance," Council on Foreign Relations, https://www.cfr.org/china-global-governance/.

19 黄彦中等，“中国的全球治理方式”，外交关系委员会，https://www.cfr.org/china-global-governance/。

20 United Nations, "The United Nations in China," https://china.un.org/en/about/about-the-un.

20 联合国，“联合国在中国”，https://china.un.org/en/about/about-the-un。

21 Samuel Kim, "International Organizations in Chinese Foreign Policy," Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 519, no. 1 (1992): 140-57.

21 Samuel Kim，“中国外交政策中的国际组织”，《美国政治和社会科学学会年鉴》519，第 1 期（1992 年）：140-57。

22 Gene Tidrick et al., China: An Evaluation of World Bank Assistance (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2005), 7; Pieter Bottelier, "China and the World Bank: How a Partnership Was Built," Journal of Contemporary China 16, no. 51 (2007): 239-58.

22 Gene Tidrick 等人，《中国：世界银行援助评估》（华盛顿特区：世界银行，2005 年），第 7 页；Pieter Bottelier，“中国与世界银行：伙伴关系是如何建立的”，《当代中国杂志》16，第 51 期（2007 年）：239-58。

23 Cheng Li, ed., Bridging Minds Across the Pacific: US–China Educational Exchanges, 1978–2003 (Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 2005).

23 程莉编，《跨越太平洋的思想桥梁：1978-2003 年美中教育交流》（马里兰州兰哈姆：列克星敦出版社，2005 年）。

24 Eric Fish, "End of an Era? A History of Chinese Students in America," China Project, May 12, 2020. https://thechinaproject.com/2020/05/12/end-of-an-era-a-history-of-chinese-students-in-america/#.

24 Eric Fish，“一个时代的终结？美国中国留学生史”，中国项目，2020 年 5 月 12 日。https://thechinaproject.com/2020/05/12/end-of-an-era-a-history-of-chinese-students-in-america/#。

25 Dong Jing, “2023 中国留学白皮书在京发布” [The 2023 White Paper on Chinese students studying abroad released in Beijing], China Daily, March 18, 2023. https://cn.chinadaily.com.cn /a/202303/18/WS641564e2a3102ada8b2342fd.html.

25 Dong Jing, “2023 中国留学白皮书在京发布” [The 2023 White Paper on Chinese students studying abroad released in Beijing], China Daily, March 18, 2023. https://cn.chinadaily.com.cn /a/202303/18/WS641564e2a3102ada8b2342fd.html.

26 John Garver, "The 'New Type' of Sino-Soviet Relations," Asian Survey 29, no. 12 (1989): 1136-52.

26 John Garver，“中苏关系的‘新型’”，《亚洲研究》29，第12期（1989年）：1136-52。

27 "We Are Confident That We Can Handle China's Affairs Well," September 16, 1989, in Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping, Volume 3 (1982-1992), 315-16.

27 “我们有信心能妥善处理中国事务”，1989 年 9 月 16 日，载《邓小平选集》第 3 卷（1982-1992 年），第 315-16 页。

28 "We Must Adhere to Socialism and Present Peaceful Evolution Towards Capitalism," November 23, 1989, in Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping, Volume 3 (1982-1992), 333-34.

28《我们必须坚持社会主义，提出和平过渡到资本主义》，1989年11月23日，载《邓小平选集》第3卷（1982-1992），第333-34页。

29 "We Must Adhere to Socialism," 333.

29 “我们必须坚持社会主义”，333。

30 "Seize the Opportunity to Develop the Economy," December 24, 1990, in Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping, Volume 3 (1982-1992), 350.

30 “抓住发展经济的机遇”，1990 年 12 月 24 日，载《邓小平选集》第 3 卷（1982-1992 年），第 350 页。

31 "The International Situation and Economic Problems," March 3, 1990, in Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping, Volume 3 (1982-1992), 341.

31《国际形势和经济问题》，1990 年 3 月 3 日，载《邓小平选集》第 3 卷（1982-1992 年），第 341 页。

32 "With Stable Policies of Reform and Opening to the Outside World, China Can Have Great Hopes for the Future," September 4, 1989, in Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping, Volume 3 (1982-1992), 310.

32 “中国凭借稳定的改革开放政策，对未来充满希望”，1989 年 9 月 4 日，载《邓小平选集》第 3 卷（1982-1992 年），第 310 页。

33 "With Stable Policies of Reform and Opening," 311; "Seize the Opportunity to Develop the Economy," December 24, 1990, in Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping, Volume 3 (1982-1992), 350. The first twelve Chinese characters are冷静观察，稳住阵脚，and 沉着应付. Deng later added 有所作为.

33 "With Stable Policies of Reform and Opening," 311; "Seize the Opportunity to Develop the Economy," December 24, 1990, in Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping, Volume 3 (1982-1992), 350. The first twelve Chinese characters are冷静观察，稳住阵脚，and 沉着应付. Deng later added 有所作为.

34 Deng Xiaoping, 邓小平年谱下册, 1346.

34 Deng Xiaoping, 邓小平年谱下册, 1346.

35 Deng Xiaoping, "With Stable Policies of Reform and Opening to the Outside World, China Can Have Great Hopes for the Future," September 4, 1989, in Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping, Volume 3, 310.

35 邓小平，《中国保持改革开放政策稳定，对未来充满希望》，1989年9月4日，载《邓小平选集》第3卷，第310页。

36 Deng Xiaoping, "Urgent Trasks of China's Third Generation of Collective Leadership," June 16, 1989, in Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping, Volume 3 (1982-1992), 311.

36 邓小平，《中国第三代集体领导的紧迫任务》，1989年6月16日，载《邓小平选集》第3卷（1982-1992），第311页。

37 World Bank, "GDP (current US$)—China, United States," https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.CD?locations=CN-US.

37 世界银行，“GDP（现价美元）—中国、美国”，https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.CD?locations=CN-US。

38 Roger Sullivan, "Discarding the China Card," Foreign Policy, no. 86 (1992): 3-23.

38 Roger Sullivan，“放弃中国牌”，《外交政策》，第 86 期（1992 年）：3-23。

39 Edward Walsh, "Clinton Indicts Bush's World Leadership," Washington Post, October 2, 1992, https://www.washingtonpost.com/archive/politics/1992/10/02/clinton-indicts-bushs-world-leadership/a68703ae-1982-4396-ab19-547994b82aaa/; John Broder and Staff Writers, "Clinton Reverses His Policy," Los Angeles Times, May 27, 1994. https://www.latimes.com/archives/la-xpm-1994-05-27-mn-62877-story.html.

39 爱德华·沃尔什，《克林顿谴责布什的世界领导地位》，《华盛顿邮报》，1992年10月2日，https://www.washingtonpost.com/archive/politics/1992/10/02/clinton-indicts-bushs-world-leadership/a68703ae-1982-4396-ab19-547994b82aaa/；约翰·布罗德和特约撰稿人，《克林顿改变政策》，《洛杉矶时报》，1994年5月27日，https://www.latimes.com/archives/la-xpm-1994-05-27-mn-62877-story.html。

40 Denny Roy, "The 'China Threat' Issue: Major Arguments," Asian Survey 36, no. 8 (1996): 758-71.

40 Denny Roy，“‘中国威胁’问题：主要论点”，《亚洲调查》36，第 8 期（1996 年）：758-71。

41 Gideon Rachman, "Containing China," Washington Quarterly 19, no. 1 (1996): 126-39; Denny Roy "Hegemon on the Horizon? China's Threat to East Asian Security," International Security 19, no. 1 (1994): 149-68; Richard Bernstein and Ross Munro, The Coming Conflict with China (New York: Knopf, 1997).

41 Gideon Rachman，“遏制中国”，《华盛顿季刊》19，第 1 期（1996 年）：126-39；Denny Roy，“地平线上的霸权？中国对东亚安全的威胁”，《国际安全》19，第 1 期（1994 年）：149-68；Richard Bernstein 和 Ross Munro，《即将到来的与中国的冲突》（纽约：Knopf，1997 年）。

42 Scott Kennedy and Michael O'Hanlon, "Time to Shift Gears on China Policy," Journal of East Asian Affairs 10, no. 1 (1996): 45-73; Ezra Vogel, Living with China: U.S.-China Relations in the Twenty-First Century (New York: Norton, 1997); Michael Gallagher, "China's Illusory Threat to the South China Sea," International Security 19, no. 1 (1994): 169-94.

42 Scott Kennedy 和 Michael O'Hanlon，“是时候改变对华政策了”，《东亚事务杂志》10，第 1 期（1996 年）：45-73；Ezra Vogel，《与中国共存：21 世纪的美中关系》（纽约：诺顿出版社，1997 年）；Michael Gallagher，“中国对南海的虚幻威胁”，《国际安全》19，第 1 期（1994 年）：169-94。

43 Bates Gill, "Limited Engagement," Foreign Affairs 78, no. 4 (1999): 65-76.

43 Bates Gill，“有限接触”，《外交事务》78，第 4 期（1999 年）：65-76。

44 Robert L. Suettinger, Beyond Tiananmen: The Politics of US-China Relations 1989-2000 (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press, 2003).

44 Robert L. Suettinger，《超越天安门：1989-2000 年美中关系的政治》（华盛顿特区：布鲁金斯学会出版社，2003 年）。

45 Jiang Zemin, "Our Diplomatic Work Must Unswervingly Safeguard the Highest Interests of the State and the Nation," July 12, 1993, in Selected Works of Jiang Zemin, vol. 1 (Beijing: Foreign Languages Press, 2010), 303-4.

45 江泽民，《我们的外交工作必须坚定不移地维护国家和民族的最高利益》，1993年7月12日，载《江泽民选集》第1卷（北京：外文出版社，2010年），第303-304页。

46 Jiang Zemin, "The Present International Situation and Our Diplomatic Work," August 28, 1998, in Selected Works of Jiang Zemin, vol. 11 (Beijing: Foreign Languages Press, 2012), 193.

46 江泽民，《当前国际形势与我国外交工作》，1998年8月28日，载《江泽民选集》第11卷（北京：外文出版社，2012年），第193页。

47 Jiang Zemin, 199.

47 Jiang Zemin, 199.

48 Xiaoxiong Yi, "China's U.S. Policy Conundrum in the 1990s: Balancing Autonomy and Interdependence," Asian Survey 34, no. 8 (1994): 675-91.

48 易晓雄，《20 世纪 90 年代中国的对美政策难题：平衡自主与相互依存》，《亚洲研究》34，第 8 期（1994 年）：675-91。

49 David Lampton, Same Bed, Different Dreams: Managing U.S.-China Relations, 1989-2000 (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2001).

49 David Lampton，《同一张床，不同的梦想：管理美中关系，1989-2000》（伯克利：加州大学出版社，2001 年）。

50 Jiang Zemin, "The Present International Situation and Our Diplomatic Work," 193.

50 江泽民，《当前国际形势和我国外交工作》，193。

51 Jiang Zemin, 197.

51 Jiang Zemin, 197.

52 Tai Ming Cheung, "Disarmament and Development in China: The Relationship Between National Defense and Economic Development," Asian Survey 28, no. 7 (1988): 757-74; Thomas Bickford "The Business Operations of the Chinese People's Liberation Army," Problems of Post-Communism 46, no. 6 (1999): 28-36.

52 戴明昌，“中国的裁军与发展：国防与经济发展的关系”，《亚洲调查》28，第 7 期（1988 年）：757-74；托马斯·比克福德，“中国人民解放军的商业运作”，《后共产主义问题》46，第 6 期（1999 年）：28-36。

53 Jiang Zemin, "Our Diplomatic Work Must Unswervingly Safeguard the Highest Interests of the State and the Nation," July 12, 1993, in Selected Works of Jiang Zemin, vol. 1, 302.

53 江泽民，《我们的外交工作必须坚定不移地维护国家和民族的最高利益》，1993年7月12日，载《江泽民选集》第1卷，第302页。

54 Jiang Zemin, "Concerning Our Military Strategic Principle and Issues of Defense Technology," June 8, 15, and 25, 1991, in Selected Works of Jiang Zemin, vol. 1, 142-50.

54 江泽民，《我国军事战略原则和国防技术问题》，1991年6月8日、15日和25日，载《江泽民选集》第1卷，142-150页。

55 Jiang Zemin, "Respond to the Challenges of World Military Development in a Spirit of Reform and Innovation," December 14, 1996, in Selected Works of Jiang Zemin, vol. 1, 592.

55 江泽民，《以改革创新精神应对世界军事发展挑战》，1996年12月14日，载《江泽民选集》第1卷，第592页。

56 Anthony Cordesman and Martin Kleiber, Chinese Military Modernization: Force Development and Strategic Capabilities (Washington, DC: CSIS Press, 2007); Thomas Christensen, "China, the US-Japan Alliance, and the Security Dilemma in East Asia," International Security 23, no. 4 (1999): 49-80.

56 Anthony Cordesman 和 Martin Kleiber，《中国军事现代化：部队发展和战略能力》（华盛顿特区：CSIS出版社，2007年）；Thomas Christensen，“中国、美日同盟和东亚安全困境”，《国际安全》23，第4期（1999年）：49-80。

57 Statistical Yearbook of China 2004 (Beijing: 中国统计出版社, 2004), 323.

57 Statistical Yearbook of China 2004 (Beijing: 中国统计出版社, 2004), 323.

58 Anthony Cordesman and Joseph Kendall, "Chinese Strategy and Military Modernization," Center for Strategic and International Studies, Policy File 2007, 127.

58 Anthony Cordesman 和 Joseph Kendall，“中国战略与军事现代化”，战略与国际研究中心，政策文件 2007，127。

59 Cordesman and Kendall, 135.

59 Cordesman 和 Kendall，135。

60 Shaoguang Wang, "Estimating China's Defence Expenditure: Some Evidence from Chinese Sources," China Quarterly, no. 147 (1996): 889-911; Richard A. Bitzinger, "Just the Facts, Ma'am: The Challenge of Analysing and Assessing Chinese Military Expenditures," China Quarterly, no. 173 (2003): 164-75.

60 王绍光，《估算中国国防开支：来自中国方面的一些证据》，《中国季刊》，第147期（1996年）：889-911；理查德·A·比辛格，《事实胜于雄辩：分析和评估中国军事开支的挑战》，《中国季刊》，第173期（2003年）：164-75。

61 Evan Medeiros et al., A New Direction for China's Defense Industry (Santa Monica, CA: Rand Corporation, 2005); Richard Bitzinger, "Modernising China's Military, 1997-2012," China Perspectives, no. 4 (2011): 7-15.

61 Evan Medeiros 等人，《中国国防工业的新方向》（加利福尼亚州圣莫尼卡：兰德公司，2005 年）；Richard Bitzinger，“中国军队现代化，1997-2012 年”，《中国视角》，第 4 期（2011 年）：7-15。

62 Qimao Chen, "New Approaches in China's Foreign Policy: The Post-Cold War Era," Asian Survey 33, no. 3 (1993): 237-51.

62 陈启茂，《中国外交政策的新方法：后冷战时代》，《亚洲研究》33，第3期（1993年）：237-51。

63 Gilbert Rozman, "Sino-Russian Relations in the 1990s: A Balance Sheet," Post-Soviet Affairs 14, no. 2 (1998): 93-113; Rajan Menon, "The Limits of Chinese-Russian Partnership," Survival 51, no. 3 (2009): 99-130.

63 Gilbert Rozman，“20 世纪 90 年代的中俄关系：一份资产负债表”，《后苏联事务》14，第 2 期（1998 年）：93-113；Rajan Menon，“中俄伙伴关系的局限性”，《生存》51，第 3 期（2009 年）：99-130。

64 Jing-dong Yuan, "China's Role in Establishing and Building the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO)," Journal of Contemporary China 19, no. 67 (2010): 855-69.

64 袁景东，《中国在建立和发展上海合作组织（上合组织）中的作用》，《当代中国》19，第67期（2010年）：855-69。

65 Johannes Schmidt, "China's Soft Power Diplomacy in Southeast Asia," Copenhagen Journal of Asian Studies 26, no. 1 (2008): 22-49.

65 Johannes Schmidt，“中国在东南亚的软实力外交”，《哥本哈根亚洲研究杂志》26，第1期（2008年）：22-49。

66 Amna Khokhar, "Sino-Indian Relations: Implications for Pakistan," Strategic Studies 30, no. 3/4 (2010): 73-84.

66 Amna Khokhar，“中印关系：对巴基斯坦的影响”，战略研究 30，第 1 期。 3/4（2010）：73-84。

67 Michael Yahuda, Sino-Japanese Relations After the Cold War: Two Tigers Sharing a Mountain (London: Routledge, 2013).

67 Michael Yahuda，《冷战后的中日关系：两虎共筑一座山》（伦敦：Routledge出版社，2013年）。

68 Yu-Jie Chen, "One China' Contention in China-Taiwan Relations: Law, Politics and Identity," China Quarterly, no. 252 (2022): 1025-44.

68 陈宇杰，《一个中国与台湾关系中的“一个中国”之争：法律、政治与身份认同》，《中国季刊》，252（2022）：1025-44。

69 Statistical Yearbook of China 1995 (Beijing: 中国统计出版社, 1995), 543, 555.

69 Statistical Yearbook of China 1995 (Beijing: 中国统计出版社, 1995), 543, 555.

70 Robert Ross, "The 1995-96 Taiwan Strait Confrontation: Coercion, Credibility, and the Use of Force," International Security 25, no. 2 (2000): 87-123.

70 Robert Ross，“1995-96 年台湾海峡对抗：胁迫、信誉和武力使用”，《国际安全》25，第 2 期（2000 年）：87-123。

71 Kerry Dumbaugh, "Taiwan in 2004: Elections, Referenda, and Other Democratic Challenges," CRS Report for Congress, January 10, 2005. https://apps.dtic.mil/sti/pdfs/ADA462920.pdf.

71 Kerry Dumbaugh，“2004 年的台湾：选举、公投和其他民主挑战”，国会研究服务处报告，2005 年 1 月 10 日。https://apps.dtic.mil/sti/pdfs/ADA462920.pdf。

72 Jiang Zemin, "Review and Summary of the Central Military Commission's Work Over the Last Ten Years," November 24, 1999, in Selected Works of Jiang Zemin, vol. 11, 465.

72 江泽民，《回顾和总结中央军委近十年的工作》，1999年11月24日，载《江泽民选集》第11卷，第465页。

73 Martin Wolf, Why Globalization Works (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2004).

73 Martin Wolf，《全球化为何有效》（纽黑文，康涅狄格州：耶鲁大学出版社，2004 年）。

74 Jiang Zemin, “The Present International Situation and Our Diplomatic Work,” August 28, 1998, 197.

74 江泽民，《当前国际形势和我国外交工作》，1998年8月28日，第197页。

75 Yeling Tan, Disaggregating China, Inc.: State Strategies in the Liberal Economic Order (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2021).

75 谭叶玲，《中国公司解构：自由经济秩序中的国家战略》（纽约州伊萨卡：康奈尔大学出版社，2021 年）。

76 Statistical Yearbook of China 2013, https://www.stats.gov.cn/sj/ndsj/2013/indexch.htm.

76 中国统计年鉴 2013，https://www.stats.gov.cn/sj/ndsj/2013/indexch.htm。

77 World Bank, "GDP (current US$)—China, United States," https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.CD?locations=CN-US.

77 世界银行，“GDP（现价美元）—中国、美国”，https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.CD?locations=CN-US。

78 Richard Baum, "From 'Strategic Partners' to 'Strategic Competitors': George W. Bush and the Politics of U.S. China Policy," Journal of East Asian Studies 1, no. 2 (2001): 191-220.

78 Richard Baum，“从‘战略伙伴’到‘战略竞争对手’：乔治·W·布什与美国对华政策的政治”，《东亚研究杂志》1，第2期（2001年）：191-220。

79 David Lampton, "The Stealth Normalization of US-China Relations," National Interest, no. 73 (2003): 37-48.

79 David Lampton，“美中关系的隐性正常化”，《国家利益》，第 73 期（2003 年）：37-48。

80 “Guoji xingshi he waishi gongzuo” [The international situation and foreign affairs work], August 21, 2006, in Hu Jintao, 胡锦涛文选第二卷 [Selected works of Hu Jintao vol. 2] (Beijing: People's Publishing House, 2016), 510.

80 “Guoji xingshi he waishi gongzuo” [The international situation and foreign affairs work], August 21, 2006, in Hu Jintao, 胡锦涛文选第二卷 [Selected works of Hu Jintao vol. 2] (Beijing: People's Publishing House, 2016), 510.

81 Robert L. Suettinger, "The Rise and Descent of 'Peaceful Rise," China Leadership Monitor 12, no. 2 (2004): 1-10.

81 Robert L. Suettinger，“‘和平崛起’的兴衰”，《中国领导力观察》12，第2期（2004年）：1-10。

82 "Seize the Opportunity to Develop the Economy," December 24, 1990, in Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping, Volume 3 (1982-1992), 350.

82 “抓住发展经济的机遇”，1990 年 12 月 24 日，载《邓小平选集》第 3 卷（1982-1992 年），第 350 页。

83 HuJintao,胡锦涛文选第二卷，97-98.

83 HuJintao,胡锦涛文选第二卷，97-98.

84 Stephen Blank, "The End of the Six-Party Talks," Strategic Insights 6, no. 1 (2007): 1-16; Tomasz Grosse, "Geoeconomic Relations Between the EU and China: The Lessons from the EU Weapon Embargo and from Galileo," Geopolitics 19, no. 1 (2014): 40-65.

84 Stephen Blank，“六方会谈的结束”，《战略洞察》6，第 1 期（2007 年）：1-16；Tomasz Grosse，“欧盟与中国之间的地缘经济关系：欧盟武器禁运和伽利略计划的教训”，《地缘政治》19，第 1 期（2014 年）：40-65。

85 Rush Doshi, "Hu's to Blame for China's Foreign Assertiveness?", in Global China: Assessing China's Growing Role in the World, ed. Tarun Chhabra et al. (Washington DC: Brookings Institution Press, 2021), 25-32.

85 Rush Doshi，“胡志明应该为中国的对外强硬态度负责吗？”，载于《全球中国：评估中国在世界上日益增长的作用》，Tarun Chhabra 等编（华盛顿特区：布鲁金斯学会出版社，2021 年），第 25-32 页。

86 Hu Jintao, 胡锦涛文选第三卷, 236-38; Robert Zoellick, “Whither China: From Membership to Responsibility,” US Department of State, September 21, 2005, https://2001-2009.state.gov/s/d/former/zoellick/rem/53682.htm.

86 Hu Jintao, 胡锦涛文选第三卷, 236-38; Robert Zoellick, “Whither China: From Membership to Responsibility,” US Department of State, September 21, 2005, https://2001-2009.state.gov/s/d/former/zoellick/rem/53682.htm.

87 Minxin Pei, "China in Xi's 'New Era': A Play for Global Leadership," Journal of Democracy 29, no. 2 (2018): 39.

87 裴敏欣，“习近平‘新时代’中的中国：争夺全球领导地位”，《民主杂志》29，第2期（2018年）：39。

88 Anne-Marie Brady, "Authoritarianism Goes Global (II): China's Foreign Propaganda Machine," Journal of Democracy 26, no. 4 (2015): 51-59.

88 Anne-Marie Brady，“威权主义走向全球（二）：中国的对外宣传机器”，《民主杂志》26，第 4 期（2015 年）：51-59。

89 Sanaa Hafeez, "The Senkaku/Diaoyu Islands Crises of 2004, 2010, and 2012: A Study of Japanese-Chinese Crisis Management," Asia-Pacific Review 22, no. 1 (2015): 73-99.

89 Sanaa Hafeez，“2004 年、2010 年和 2012 年的尖阁诸岛/钓鱼岛危机：日中危机管理研究”，亚太评论 22，第 1 期（2015 年）：73-99。

90 Carlyle Thayer, "The United States and Chinese Assertiveness in the South China Sea," Security Challenges 6, no. 2 (2010): 69-84.

90 Carlyle Thayer，“美国和中国在南海的强硬姿态”，《安全挑战》6，第 2 期（2010 年）：69-84。

91 Xue Litai, 盛世危言: 远观中国大战略 [Warnings in times of prosperity: Long-term perspectives on Chinese grand strategy] (Shanghai: 东方出版社, 2014).

91 Xue Litai, 盛世危言: 远观中国大战略 [Warnings in times of prosperity: Long-term perspectives on Chinese grand strategy] (Shanghai: 东方出版社, 2014).

92 Thomas Christensen, "The Advantages of an Assertive China: Responding to Beijing's Abrasive Diplomacy," Foreign Affairs 90, no. 2 (2011): 54-67.

92 Thomas Christensen，“强势中国的优势：应对北京的强硬外交”，《外交事务》90，第 2 期（2011 年）：54-67。

93 Hillary Clinton, "America's Pacific Century," Foreign Policy, no. 189 (2011): 56-63.

93 希拉里·克林顿，《美国的太平洋世纪》，《外交政策》，第 189 期（2011 年）：56-63。

94 Xi Jinping, “中国必须有自己特色的大国外交” [China must have its unique great power diplomacy], in 习近平著作选读第一卷 (Beijing: 人民出版社, 2023), 317-20.

94 Xi Jinping, “中国必须有自己特色的大国外交” [China must have its unique great power diplomacy], in 习近平著作选读第一卷 (Beijing: 人民出版社, 2023), 317-20.

95 Li Jinqiu, “习近平：提高我国参与全球治理的能力”[Xi Jinping: Increase our country's capacity to participate in global governance], 新华社 [New China News Agency], September 24, 2019, http://cn.chinadiplomacy.org.cn/2019-09/24/content_75240337.shtml.

95 Li Jinqiu, “习近平：提高我国参与全球治理的能力”[Xi Jinping: Increase our country's capacity to participate in global governance], 新华社 [New China News Agency], September 24, 2019, http://cn.chinadiplomacy.org.cn/2019-09/24/content_75240337.shtml.

96 Xi Jinping, “深入理解新发展理念” [Deepening understanding of new concepts of development], in 习近平著作选读第一卷, 437-39.

96 Xi Jinping, “深入理解新发展理念” [Deepening understanding of new concepts of development], in 习近平著作选读第一卷, 437-39.

97 Xi Jinping, "Follow the Trend of the Times and Promote Global Peace and Development," March 23, 2013, in Xi Jinping, The Governance of China (Beijing: Foreign Languages Press, 2014), 298-99.

97 习近平，《顺应时代潮流，促进世界和平与发展》，2013年3月23日，载习近平，《治国理政》（北京：外文出版社，2014年），第298-299页。

98 Xi Jinping, “在全国党校工作会议上的讲话” [Speech at the National Conference on Party Schools], 求是 [Qiushi], May 1, 2016, http://www.xinhuanet.com/politics/2016-05/01/c_128951529.htm.

98 Xi Jinping, “在全国党校工作会议上的讲话” [Speech at the National Conference on Party Schools], 求是 [Qiushi], May 1, 2016, http://www.xinhuanet.com/politics/2016-05/01/c_128951529.htm.

99 Xi Jinping, “New Approach for Asian Security Cooperation,” May 21, 2014, in Xi Jinping, The Governance of China, 392.

99 习近平，《亚洲安全合作新方针》，2014 年 5 月 21 日，载于习近平，《治国理政》，第 392 页。

100 World Bank, "GDP Growth (Annual %)—Euro Area, United States, Japan, China," https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.KD.ZG?locations=XC-US-JP-CN.

100 世界银行，“GDP 增长率（年百分比）—欧元区、美国、日本、中国”，https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.KD.ZG?locations=XC-US-JP-CN。

101 World Bank, "GDP (Current US$)—China, United States," https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.CD?locations=CN-US.

101 世界银行，“GDP（现价美元）—中国、美国”，https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.CD?locations=CN-US。

102 World Bank, "GDP, PPP (Current International $)—China, United States," https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.PP.CD?locations=CN-US.

102 世界银行，“GDP，PPP（当前国际美元）—中国，美国”，https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.PP.CD?locations=CN-US。

103 Mackenzie Eaglen, "Estimating the Costs of 20 Years in Afghanistan," American Enterprise Institute, August 28, 2021, https://www.aei.org/op-eds/estimating-the-costs-of-20-years-in-afghanistan/.

103 Mackenzie Eaglen，“估算阿富汗 20 年的成本”，美国企业研究所，2021 年 8 月 28 日，https://www.aei.org/op-eds/estimating-the-costs-of-20-years-in-afghanistan/。

104 Watson Institute of International and Public Affairs, "Costs of War," Brown University, August 2021, https://watson.brown.edu/costsofwar/figures/2021/human-and-budgetary-costs-date-us-war-afghanistan-2001-2022.

104 沃森国际与公共事务研究所，《战争的代价》，布朗大学，2021 年 8 月，https://watson.brown.edu/costsofwar/figures/2021/human-and-budgetary-costs-date-us-war-afghanistan-2001-2022。

105 Dmitri Trenin, "Russia Reborn: Reimagining Moscow's Foreign Policy," Foreign Affairs 88, no. 6 (2009): 64-78.

105 Dmitri Trenin，“俄罗斯重生：重新构想莫斯科的外交政策”，《外交事务》88，第6期（2009年）：64-78。

106 Elizabeth Wishnick, "Sino-Russian Consolidation at a Time of Geopolitical Rivalry," China Leadership Monitor, no. 63 (2020), https://www.prcleader.org/post/sino-russian-consolidation-at-a-time-of-geopolitical-rivalry; "China-Russia 2023 Trade Value Hits Record High of $240 bln," Reuters, January 12, 2024, https://www.reuters.com/markets/china-russia-2023-trade-value-hits-record-high-240-bln-chinese-customs-2024-01-12/.

106 Elizabeth Wishnick，“中俄在地缘政治竞争时期的整合”，《中国领导力观察》，第63期（2020年），https://www.prcleader.org/post/sino-russian-consolidation-at-a-time-of-geopolitical-rivalry；“中俄2023年贸易额创2400亿美元历史新高”，路透社，2024年1月12日，https://www.reuters.com/markets/china-russia-2023-trade-value-hits-record-high-240-bln-chinese-customs-2024-01-12/。

107 Nadège Rolland, "China's 'Belt and Road Initiative': Underwhelming or Game-Changer?", Washington Quarterly 40, no. 1 (2017): 127-42.

107 Nadège Rolland，“中国的‘一带一路’倡议：令人失望还是改变游戏规则？”，《华盛顿季刊》40，第 1 期（2017 年）：127-42。

108 Alice De Jonge, "Perspectives on the Emerging Role of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank," International Affairs 93, no. 5 (2017): 1061-84; Sergio Suchodolski and Julien Demeulemeester, "The BRICS Coming of Age and the New Development Bank," Global Policy 9, no. 4 (2018): 578-85.

108 Alice De Jonge，“亚洲基础设施投资银行新兴作用的展望”，《国际事务》93，第 5 期（2017 年）：1061-84；Sergio Suchodolski 和 Julien Demeulemeester，“金砖国家的成熟与新开发银行”，《全球政策》9，第 4 期（2018 年）：578-85。

109 Ian Rinehart and Bart Elias, "China's Air Defense Identification Zone (ADIZ)," Congressional Research Service, January 30, 2015. https://china.usc.edu/sites/default/files/article/attachments/crs-2015-china-air-defense-identification-zone.pdf.

109 Ian Rinehart 和 Bart Elias，“中国的防空识别区 (ADIZ)”，国会研究服务处，2015 年 1 月 30 日。https://china.usc.edu/sites/default/files/article/attachments/crs-2015-china-air-defense-identification-zone.pdf。

110 Congressional Research Service, "U.S.-China Strategic Competition in South and East China Seas: Background and Issues for Congress," February 5, 2024, https://sgp.fas.org/crs/row/R42784.pdf.

110 国会研究服务处，“美中在南海和东海的战略竞争：背景和国会面临的问题”，2024 年 2 月 5 日，https://sgp.fas.org/crs/row/R42784.pdf。

111 Evan Medeiros, "Explaining and Understanding Competition in US-China Relations," in Cold Rivals: The New Era of US-China Strategic Competition, ed. Evan Medeiros (Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press, 2023), 25-45.

111 Evan Medeiros，“解释和理解美中关系中的竞争”，载于《冷酷的对手：美中战略竞争的新时代》，Evan Medeiros 编（华盛顿特区：乔治城大学出版社，2023 年），第 25-45 页。

112 David Shambaugh, "Assessing the US 'Pivot' to Asia," Strategic Studies Quarterly 7, no. 2 (2013): 10-19; Michael J. Green and Matthew P. Goodman, "After TPP: The Geopolitics of Asia and the Pacific," Washington Quarterly 38, no. 4 (2015): 19-34.

112 David Shambaugh，“评估美国‘转向’亚洲”，《战略研究季刊》7，第 2 期（2013 年）：10-19；Michael J. Green 和 Matthew P. Goodman，“TPP 之后：亚洲和太平洋的地缘政治”，《华盛顿季刊》38，第 4 期（2015 年）：19-34。

113 James Steinberg and Michael O'Hanlon, "Keep Hope Alive: How to Prevent U.S.-Chinese Relations from Blowing Up," Foreign Affairs 93, no. 4 (2014): 107-17.

113 James Steinberg 和 Michael O'Hanlon，“保持希望：如何防止美中关系破裂”，《外交事务》93，第 4 期（2014 年）：107-17。

114 White House, "National Security Strategy of the United States of America," December 2017, https://trumpwhitehouse.archives.gov/wp-content/uploads/2017/12NSS-Final-12-18-2017-0905.pdf.

114 白宫，《美国国家安全战略》，2017 年 12 月，https://trumpwhitehouse.archives.gov/wp-content/uploads/2017/12NSS-Final-12-18-2017-0905.pdf。

115 Bonnie Glaser and Kelly Flaherty, "US-China Relations in Free Fall," Comparative Connections 22, no. 2 (2020): 25-32.

115 Bonnie Glaser 和 Kelly Flaherty，“美中关系自由落体式下滑”，比较联系 22，第 2 期（2020 年）：25-32。

116 Antony Blinken, "The Administration's Approach to the People's Republic of China," US Department of State, May 26, 2022. https://www.state.gov/the-administrations-approach-to-the-peoples-republic-of-china/; Kurt Campbell and Jake Sullivan, "Competition Without Catastrophe: How America Can Both Challenge and Coexist with China," Foreign Affairs 98, no. 5 (2019): 96-110.

116 Antony Blinken，“本届政府对中华人民共和国的方针”，美国国务院，2022 年 5 月 26 日。https://www.state.gov/the-administrations-approach-to-the-peoples-republic-of-china/；Kurt Campbell 和 Jake Sullivan，“不引发灾难的竞争：美国如何既能挑战中国又能与中国共存”，《外交事务》98，第 5 期（2019 年）：96-110。

117 Keith Bradsher, "China's Leader, with Rare Bluntness, Blames U.S. Containment for Troubles," New York Times, March 7, 2023. https://www.nytimes.com/2023/03/07/world/asia/china-us-xi-jinping.html.

117 Keith Bradsher，“中国领导人罕见地直言不讳地指责美国遏制政策造成了目前的困境”，《纽约时报》，2023 年 3 月 7 日。https://www.nytimes.com/2023/03/07/world/asia/china-us-xi-jinping.html。





Conclusion





结论


1 中共中央文献研究室，“习近平关于实现中华民族伟大复兴的中国梦论述摘编”[Xi Jinping's selected speeches on realizing the great rejuvenation of the Chinese nation] (Beijing: Zhonggong zhongyang wenxian chubanshe, 2013).

1 中共中央文献研究室，“习近平关于实现中华民族伟大复兴的中国梦论述摘编”[Xi Jinping's selected speeches on realizing the great rejuvenation of the Chinese nation] (Beijing: Zhonggong zhongyang wenxian chubanshe, 2013).





INDEX





指数


Figures and tables are indicated by f and t following page numbers.

图表在页码后分别用 f 和 t 表示。

administrative reforms under Deng, 5, 21-25

邓小平时期的行政改革，5，21-25

Afghanistan: Soviet invasion of (1979), 225;

阿富汗：苏联入侵（1979 年），225；

US war in (2001), 243, 249, 254

美国战争（2001 年），第 243、249、254 页

after-school coaching industry, 216-17

课后辅导行业，216-17

age limits of officials. See mandatory retirements

官员年龄限制。参见强制退休规定。

agricultural reforms: agricultural tax abolished by Hu, 106; as attractive starting point for economic reform, 49; big-bang approach to, 50; bottom-up peasant initiatives and, 47, 49; decollectivization, 14, 16, 36, 37, 46, 49, 51, 72, 153; Deng vs. Chen on, 25; Deng's support as critical to, 50; food self-sufficiency as Xi's goal, 211-12; increase in productivity, 46, 47; land reform for farmers (2013), 196; privatization, 98, 135; Zhao and, 18. See also rural population of China

农业改革：胡锦涛废除农业税，第106页；作为经济改革的理想起点，第49页；大爆炸式改革，第50页；自下而上的农民倡议，第47、49页；非集体化，第14、16、36、37、46、49、51、72、153页；邓小平与陈志远，第25页；邓小平的支持至关重要，第50页；粮食自给自足是习近平的目标，第211-212页；提高生产力，第46、47页；农民土地改革（2013年），第196页；私有化，第98、135页；赵志强，第18页。另见中国农村人口。

Ant Group's Initial Public Offering, 216

蚂蚁集团首次公开募股，216

anti-American demonstrations (1999), 91-92

反美示威活动（1999），91-92页

anti-bourgeois liberalization campaign, 25, 37-40

反资产阶级自由化运动，25，37-40

anti-espionage law (2023), 190

反间谍法（2023年），190

anticorruption campaigns, 99-100, 168-69; disciplinary code and procedures for, 173; Wang as CDIC head leading investigations, 169; Xi using to purge political rivals, 1, 2, 11, 13, 86-88, 112, 120, 122, 128, 165, 167, 169-73, 179-80, 187, 255, 259

反腐败运动，99-100页，168-169页；纪律守则和程序，173页；王健林担任中投行行长领导调查，169页；习近平利用此举清除政治对手，1页，2页，11页，13页，86-88页，112页，120页，122页，128页，165页，167页，169-173页，179-180页，187页，255页，259页。

antiriot forces, 92-93; Taishi village incident (2005) and, 117-18

防暴部队，92-93；太石村事件（2005）和，117-18

artificial intelligence (AI), 211

人工智能（AI），211

Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, 247, 250

亚洲基础设施投资银行，247，250

authoritarianism: difficulty of institutionalizing politics, 189; East Asia's economic

威权主义：政治制度化的困难，189；东亚经济

growth and, 48; no third-party enforcement in, 25; transition from totalitarianism to, 30. See also neo-authoritarian developmentalism

增长，48；没有第三方强制执行，25；从极权主义过渡到，30。另见新威权发展主义

baby formula case (2008), 115

婴儿配方奶粉案（2008），115



balance of power: ceasing to exist, allowing Xi's restoration of totalitarianism, 188; in post-Tiananmen era, 87-88, 98-99, 168-69. See also world order

权力平衡：不复存在，导致习近平恢复极权主义，第188页；后天安门时代，第87-88页、98-99页、168-169页。另见世界秩序。

banking. See fiscal reform; specific names of banks

银行业。参见财政改革；具体银行名称

bankruptcy of SOEs. See state-owned enterprises

国有企业破产。参见国有企业。

Bao Tong, 30

Bao Tong, 30

Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), 247, 249-50

“一带一路”倡议（BRI），247，249-50

Biden, Joe: blocking Chinese access to high-end chips, 211; containment policy instituted by, 207, 252; tariffs and, 205

拜登，乔：阻止中国获取高端芯片，211；遏制政策由……实施，207、252；关税和，205

Big Fund (China Integrated Circuit Industry Investment Fund), 211

大基金（中国集成电路产业投资基金），211

BoXilai,123,126-28,170

盒子，123、126-28、170

Bo Yibo, 78

薄一博，78岁

bourgeois liberalization, 5, 20, 25, 35-40. See also liberalism (1980s)

资产阶级自由化，第5、20、25、35-40页。另见自由主义（1980年代）。

bribery. See corruption

贿赂。参见腐败。

BRICS summit (2012), 250

金砖国家峰会（2012年），250

Brus,Wlodzimierz,48

布鲁斯，弗拉基米尔，48岁

Bush, George H. W., 227, 233

布什，乔治·H·W·布什，227，233

Bush, George W., 233, 242-43

布什，乔治·W，233，242-43



cadre management system, 21-22, 32; Trial Regulations on the Selection and Appointment of Party and Government Leading Cadres (1995), 85. See also mandatory retirements capitalism's growth in China: Deng's policies and, 45, 74, 225; Jiang's "advanced social productive forces" and, 96; neo-authoritarian developmentalism and, 77, 101, 231. See also crony capitalism; neo-authoritarian developmentalism; West, economic engagement with

干部管理制度，第21-22页、第32页；《党政领导干部遴选和任命试行条例》（1995年），第85页。另见强制退休；中国资本主义的增长：邓小平的政策，第45页、第74页、第225页；江泽民的“先进社会生产力”，第96页；新威权发展主义，第77页、第101页、第231页。另见裙带资本主义；新威权发展主义；西方经济交往

Carter,Jimmy,226

卡特，吉米，226

Case of Fake Medicines in Jinjiang scandal (1985), 63

晋江假药案（1985年），63

CCP. See Chinese Communist Party

中国共产党。参见中国共产党

"The CCP Center's Resolution on Several Questions on Establishing Institutions of a Socialist Market Economy" (Third Plenum), 84

《中共中央关于建立社会主义市场经济制度若干问题的中央委员会决议》（三中全会），第84页

"The CCP Decision on Further Strengthening and Improving Public Security Work" (2003), 112

《中共关于进一步加强和完善公安工作的决定》（2003年），第112页

censorship, 6, 7, 35, 43, 102, 107, 122, 180, 196. See also Great Firewall of China; press freedom, Xi's repression of

审查制度，第6、7、35、43、102、107、122、180、196页。另见中国防火长城；新闻自由，习近平的镇压

Central Advisory Committee, 63

中央咨询委员会，63

Central Committee: Third Plenum (2013), 84, 195; Fifth Plenum (2020), 209-10; annual written self-evaluations required by Xi, 175; Deng's choices for, 80; naming Xi as "core leader," 174; patronage's role in selection of members, 85; resolutions' lack of enforceability, 28; Xi's purges targeting members, 171-72. See also specific documents by name

中央委员会：第三次全会（2013年），第84、195页；第五次全会（2020年），第209-210页；习近平要求每年进行书面自我评估，第175页；邓小平的选择，第80页；任命习近平为“核心领导人”，第174页；裙带关系在委员遴选中的作用，第85页；决议缺乏执行力，第28页；习近平针对委员的清洗，第171-172页。另见按姓名列出的具体文件。

Central Discipline Inspection Commission (CDIC), 169-71, 173, 175

中央纪律检查委员会（CDIC），169-71、173、175

Central Leading Small Group on Comprehensively Deepening Reform, 174

中央全面深化改革领导小组，174

Central Leading Small Group on Cybersecurity and Informatization, 179-80, 197

网络安全和信息化中央领导小组，179-80，197

Central Military Commission: Jiang retaining chairmanship after retirement, 88, 102-3; new defense doctrine (1993), 236

中央军委：江泽民退休后继续担任主席，第88、102-103页；新国防理论（1993年），第236页

Central Political and Legal Affairs Commission, 92

中央政法事务委员会，92

Central Political-Legal Committee, abolition of, 32

中央政法委员会，废除，32

century of humiliation, 8

一个世纪的屈辱，8

Chen Liangyu, 123, 124, 126, 168

Chen Liangyu, 123, 124, 126, 168

Chen Quanguo, 183-84

Chen Quanguo, 183-84

Chen Shui-bian, 240, 242-43

Chen Shui-bian, 240, 242-43

Chen Xitong, 86, 168

Chen Xitong, 86, 168

Chen Yixin, 172

Chen Yixin, 172

Chen Yun: agricultural reform, neutral stance on, 49; background of, 18; as CDIC chief, 169; command economy favored by, 19, 21, 25; Deng outmaneuvering, 24, 27; as Deng's co-leader, 2-3; disapproval of and attack on liberals, 34, 39; economic policy disagreement with Deng, 16, 25-27, 63, 72, 253; foreign trade and, 59; as hard-line leader, 2, 6, 9, 19, 233; poor health and inactive in early 1990s, 78, 79-80; private sector's rise opposed by, 63; purged by Mao, 2, 17; SEZs opposed by, 27

陈云：农业改革，中立立场，49；背景，18；担任中投行行长，169；支持指令型经济，19、21、25；邓小平的策略，24、27；作为邓小平的共同领导人，2-3；反对和攻击自由派，34、39；与邓小平的经济政策分歧，16、25-27、63、72、253；对外贸易，59；作为强硬派领导人，2、6、9、19、233；20世纪90年代初健康状况不佳且不活跃，78、79-80；反对私营部门崛起，63；被毛泽东清洗，2、17；反对经济特区，27

China dream, 8, 168, 224, 225, 258-59

中国梦，8，168，224，225，258-59

China Integrated Circuit Industry Investment Fund (ICF), 211

中国集成电路产业投资基金（ICF），211

China-US trade war. See US-China trade war

中美贸易战。参见美中贸易战。

Chinese Communist Party (CCP): Thirteenth Party Congress (1987), 31, 38, 39, 43; Fourteenth Party Congress (1992), 80, 83; Fifteenth Party Congress (1997), 87; Seventeenth Party Congress (2007), 88, 109, 124; Eighteenth Party Congress (2012), 164; Nineteenth Party Congress (2017), 174, 176; Twentieth Party Congress (2022), 1, 177, 190, 218; capitalist threat, containment of, 13; centennial celebration (2021), 175; "democracy in the party" encouraged by Deng, 23; Deng's institutional reforms of, 21-25; institutional features of, 6, 22; institutionalization of, 84-88, 187; leadership of, 5; more homogeneous in post-Tiananmen era, 74, 85, 97-98; popular support (see regime legitimacy and performance legitimacy); Regulations on Chinese Communist Party Discipline and Sanctions (1997), 85; resistant to political liberalization, 5; Soviet collapse, effect of, 81-82; Trial Regulations on the Selection and Appointment of Party and Government Leading Cadres (1995), 85

中国共产党：十三大（1987年），第31、38、39、43页；十四大（1992年），第80、83页；十五大（1997年），第87页；十七大（2007年），第88、109、124页；十八大（2012年），第164页；十九大（2017年），第174、176页；二十大（2022年），第1、177、190、218页；资本主义威胁与遏制，第13页；百年庆典（2021年），第175页；邓小平倡导的“党内民主”，第23页；邓小平的制度改革，第21-25页；制度特点，第6、22页；制度化，84-88，187；领导层，5；天安门事件后更加同质化，74，85，97-98；民众支持（参见政权合法性和政绩合法性）；《中国共产党纪律与惩戒条例》（1997年），85；抵制政治自由化，5；苏联解体的影响，81-82；《党政领导干部遴选与任命试行条例》（1995年），85

Chinese constitution, 24, 63, 177

中国宪法，第24、63、177条

Chinese Embassy in Belgrade, NATO bombing of (1999), 91, 240, 242

中国驻贝尔格莱德大使馆，北约轰炸（1999），91，240，242

Chinese-Foreign Contractual Joint Ventures Law (1988), 55

《中外合资企业法》（1988年），第55条

Chinese-Foreign Equity Joint Ventures Law (1979), 54-55

《中外合资企业法》（1979年），第54-55页

Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference (2023), 252

中国人民政治协商会议（2023年），252

civil society: accountability enforced by, 25, 99; Deng and, 188; effect of not having, 9, 165; Hu and, 113-19, 122; rise as threat to post-Tiananmen order, 130, 254; Xi's repression of, 173, 177-78, 181

公民社会：问责制的强制执行，25，99；邓等人，188；缺乏问责制的影响，9，165；胡等人，113-119，122；崛起对后天安门时代秩序构成威胁，130，254；习近平的镇压，173，177-178，181

Clinton, Bill, 113, 147, 150, 233, 239

克林顿，比尔，113，147，150，233，239

Clinton, Hillary, 246, 258

克林顿，希拉里，246，258

coastal cities, 40, 47, 58, 145, 153

沿海城市，40、47、58、145、153

Cold War: China not a threat in, 9, 222, 225; Deng vs. Chen on, 26; international order after end of, 231; Soviet Union as security threat in, 222

冷战：中国在冷战时期不构成威胁，第9、222、225页；邓小平与陈志远，第26页；冷战结束后的国际秩序，第231页；苏联在冷战时期构成安全威胁，第222页

collective leadership: Deng instituting, 2-3, 16, 21, 22, 23, 42, 188; Hu era and, 86, 102; Jiang era and, 97; of post-Tiananmen order, 83, 122; sustained from 1979-2012, 10, 254; vagueness and unenforceability of rules, 256; Xi's end of, 2, 175, 255

集体领导：邓小平时期建立，2-3、16、21、22、23、42、188；胡锦涛时代及，86、102；江泽民时代及，97；天安门事件后的秩序，83、122；1979-2012年持续，10、254；规则的模糊性和不可执行性，256；习近平时期结束，2、175、255

collective protests. See social unrest

集体抗议。参见社会动荡

collectively owned firms, 37, 52, 66, 143-45

集体所有制企业，37、52、66、143-45

command economy favored by hard-liners, 19, 21, 25, 50, 57, 70, 72, 253

强硬派偏爱指令型经济，19、21、25、50、57、70、72、253

communes, dismantling of, 51

公社，解散，51

"Communique on the Current State of the Ideological Sphere" (2013). See Document No. 9

《关于当前意识形态领域状况的公报》（2013年）。参见文件第9号。

communism: Deng's break from and orthodox ideology's loss of appeal, 90, 96, 222; private sector banned by, 9; Xi restoring orthodox ideology, 128, 167, 168, 188. See also Chinese Communist Party; Soviet Union, collapse of; Stalinism

共产主义：邓小平与正统意识形态的决裂及正统意识形态的吸引力下降，第90、96、222页；禁止私营部门，第9页；习近平恢复正统意识形态，第128、167、168、188页。另见中国共产党；苏联解体；斯大林主义

Communist Youth League (CYL), 123-26, 128

共青团（CYL），123-26，128

confiscation of private property. See land seizure

没收私人财产。参见土地征用。

conflict resolution, lack of peaceful channels to address, 111

冲突解决，缺乏和平解决渠道，111

conservatives: technocrats dominating party in post-Tiananmen era, 97; ultra-conservatives sidelined, 97-98. See also hard-liners of 1980s

保守派：天安门事件后，技术官僚主导党内，1997年；极端保守派被边缘化，1997-1998年。另见20世纪80年代的强硬派。

control of information. See censorship; press freedom, Xi's repression of; social media, crackdown on

信息控制。参见审查制度；新闻自由，习近平对新闻自由的压制；社交媒体，打压

corruption: bank credit for private firms and, 138; collusive, 120, 128; dual-track pricing and, 71; economic costs of, 122-23; in Hu era, 101, 119-23, 133; ineffectiveness of party's fight against, 122; likely to impact regime's support, 100, 130; neo-authoritarianism and, 75, 99-100, 122; number of bribery cases, 119, 120f; number of officials prosecuted, 120, 121f; post-Tiananmen order and, 12, 85, 98; punishment of, 84, 86-87; regime decay under Hu due to, 101, 102, 120. See also anticorruption campaigns; crony capitalism

腐败：私营企业获得银行信贷，第138页；串通，第120、128页；双轨定价，第71页；经济成本，第122-123页；胡锦涛时代，第101、119-123、133页；党的反腐败斗争无效，第122页；可能影响政权支持率，第100、130页；新威权主义，第75、99-100、122页；受贿案件数量，第119、120页及以下；被起诉官员人数，第120、121页及以下；天安门事件后的秩序，第12、85、98页；惩罚，第84、86-87页；胡锦涛政权衰落的原因，第101、102、120页。另见反腐败运动；裙带资本主义。

Corruption Perception Index, 119

腐败感知指数，119

Covid-19 pandemic: economic disruption of, 207, 217-19; housing market crash during, 162; law professor criticizing party handling of, 181; Trump blaming China for, 252; US-China trade war and, 205; Xi's neo-Stalinist agenda and, 189; "zero-Covid policy," 189-90, 218-19, 259

新冠疫情：经济中断，第207、217-219页；疫情期间房地产市场崩盘，第162页；法学教授批评党对疫情的处理，第181页；特朗普指责中国，第252页；美中贸易战，第205页；习近平的新斯大林主义议程，第189页；“零新冠政策”，第189-190、218-219、259页。

criterion of truth, 18, 37

真理的标准，18，37

cronycapitalism,11,12,102,119-23,128,256

裙带资本主义,11,12,102,119-23,128,256

cult of personality: alienation of socialism and, 33; Deng prohibiting, 2; Stalinist, 265n33; Xi restoring, 1, 167, 175-76, 256

个人崇拜：社会主义的异化，33；邓小平禁止，2；斯大林主义，265n33；习近平恢复，1，167，175-76，256

Cultural Revolution: agricultural mechanization campaign in, 51; China's education system devastated by, 229; discrediting Maoism, 9; Mao's purges, 17; reforms of 1980s leaders as reaction to, 42; removing many possible contenders for Mao's successor, 17; survivors changing party politics after, 2, 16-17; younger cohort toppling old guard, 86

文化大革命：农业机械化运动，51；中国教育体系遭受重创，229；毛泽东思想的败坏，9；毛泽东的清洗运动，17；20世纪80年代领导人对文化大革命的改革，42；清除毛泽东众多可能的接班人，17；幸存者在文化大革命后改变党内政治，2，16-17；年轻一代推翻老一代，86

culture fever of liberal wave of 1980s, 33, 43

20世纪80年代自由主义浪潮的文化热潮，33，43

cybersecurity measures, 178-80, 190-91, 196, 197

网络安全措施，第178-180页、第190-191页、第196页、第197页

Cyberspace Administration, 113

网络空间管理局，113



debt load. See end of China's economic miracle; global financial crisis; local government

债务负担。参见中国经济奇迹的终结；全球金融危机；地方政府

debt markets, 138-39

债务市场，138-39

"Decision of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China on Some Major Issues Concerning Comprehensively Deepening the Reform" (Xi reform platform 2013), 195-96

《中共中央关于全面深化改革若干重大问题的决定》（习近平改革纲领2013），195-196页

"Decision on Strengthening Comprehensive Management of Public Security" (1991), 92

《关于加强公安全综合管理的决定》（1991年），第92页

Democracy Wall Movement, 34, 94

民主墙运动，34，94

Democratic Progressive Party (DPP, Taiwan), 239-40, 244

民进党（台湾），239-40，244

democratization: authoritarian ruling elites' choices and, 4, 114; Deng's antipathy to, 22, 28, 257; elections for provincial governors and court officials, 31; factors preventing China from moving toward, 3, 4, 9, 21, 253; Hu Yaobang's interest in, 38; liberals and prodemocracy movement, 76; neo-authoritarianism incompatible with, 99; of post-Soviet Russia and post-Soviet states, 7; reform as catalyst for, 7-8; rights defense movement and, 114-19; of Taiwan, 239; wealth not deciding factor for, 4, 114; Xi's opposition to, 177, 257; Zhao's proposal of accountable system of governance, 29-32. See also liberalism (1980s); prodemocracy movement demographic dividend, 152-55, 158, 163, 193, 259

民主化：威权统治精英的选择，4，114；邓小平对……的反感，22，28，257；省长和法院官员的选举，31；阻碍中国走向民主的因素，3，4，9，21，253；胡耀邦对……的兴趣，38；自由主义者和民主运动，76；新威权主义与……不相容，99；后苏联时代的俄罗斯和后苏联国家，7；改革作为……的催化剂，7-8；维权运动，114-119；台湾，239；财富并非决定性因素，4，114；习近平对……的反对，177，257；赵立坚提出的问责制治理体系，29-32。另见自由主义（20世纪80年代）。民主运动的人口红利，152-55、158、163、193、259

DengLiqun,31,34,35,39

邓立群,31,34,35,39

Deng Xiaoping: background of, 17-18; Central Military Commission chairmanship, retaining after retirement, 88; Chen as co-leader with, 2-3; choice of leaders to protect legacy, 79-80, 83; compared to Xi, 224, 257; death of (1997), 83; economic reform agenda of, 19, 25-27; "emancipating the mind" speeches (1991), 76; four modernizations and, 53-54, 225; golden period (1992-2012) built on vision of, 75, 82, 227; Hu chosen as Jiang Zemin's successor by, 80, 87, 88, 125; institutional reforms of, 21-25; Jiang Zemin as successor, 74-75; joining international organizations and UN-affiliated agencies, 228-29; landmark speech at Politburo (1980), 21; legal reforms of, 27-28, 222; liberal leanings initially, 16, 20, 33-34, 36-38; Mao's purge of, 2, 17; neo-authoritarianism as economic strategy of 1990s, 12, 75, 77, 226, 265n33; one-party system, commitment to maintaining, 19, 20, 22, 25, 29, 34, 36, 37, 188, 224, 253, 256-57; political reforms tied to economic initiatives, 27-32; as pragmatic Leninist, 129, 253, 257; purges of liberal reformers, 5-6, 9, 12, 15, 16, 20, 33, 36-38, 41, 42, 75, 79; return to position of power after Mao's death, 17; Selected Works, 231; self-interests diluting effectiveness of reforms, 42, 189; siding with hard-liners on one-party rule, 19, 20-21, 253-54; southern tour (1992) as beginning of neo-authoritarianism, 76-77, 83, 232; Soviet Union's collapse and, 7, 77, 78, 80, 131, 232; on The Sun and the Man (movie), 35; as survivor of Cultural Revolution, 2, 9, 17; terror, use of, 44; Tiananmen Square protests crushed by, 3, 16, 20, 41, 44, 230, 256; travel abroad and to US, 53, 227; TVEs' rapid growth as surprise to, 51-52; "We Must Adhere to Socialism and Prevent Peaceful Evolution Towards Capitalism," 231. See also "Four Cardinal Principles"; reform and opening

邓小平：背景，17-18；中央军委主席，退休后继续留任，88；陈为共同领导人，2-3；选择领导人以维护政治遗产，79-80，83；与习近平的比较，224，257；逝世（1997年），83；经济改革议程，19，25-27；“解放思想”讲话（1991年），76；四个现代化，53-54，225；基于愿景建立的黄金时期（1992-2012年），75，82，227；胡锦涛被选为江泽民的接班人，80，87，88，125；体制改革，21-25；江泽民作为接班人，74-75；加入国际组织和联合国附属机构，228-229；在政治局的里程碑式讲话（1980 年），21；法律改革，27-28、222；最初的自由主义倾向，16、20、33-34、36-38；毛泽东的清洗，2、17；20 世纪 90 年代的新威权主义经济战略，12、75、77、226、265n33；一党制，致力于维护，19、20、22、25、29、34、36、37、188、224、253、256-57；与经济举措相关的政治改革，27-32；作为务实的列宁主义者，129、253、257；对自由派改革者的清洗，5-6、9、12、15、16、20、33、36-38、41、42、75、79；毛泽东去世后重返权力中心，17；《精选作品》，231；私利削弱改革的成效，42、189；支持强硬派的一党专政，19、20-21、253-54；1992年的南方巡访是新威权主义的开端，76-77、83、232；苏联解体，7、77、78、80、131、232；关于电影《太阳与人》，35；作为文化大革命的幸存者，2、9、17；恐怖主义的运用，44；天安门广场抗议活动遭到镇压，第3、16、20、41、44、230、256页；出国旅行和赴美旅行，第53、227页；电视和广播电视的快速增长令……感到惊讶，第51-52页；“我们必须坚持社会主义，防止和平过渡到资本主义”，第231页。另见“四大基本原则”；改革开放

devaluation of Chinese currency (1994), 149

中国货币贬值（1994），149

Diaoyu Islands. See Senkaku/Diaoyu Islands dispute

Diaoyu Islands. See Senkaku/Diaoyu Islands dispute

dissidents: forced into exile, 94; in peripheral regions, 183-86; subversive activities of, 178; Xi's crackdown on, 180. See also social unrest; Tiananmen Square protests

异见人士：被迫流亡，第94页；在边缘地区，第183-186页；颠覆活动，第178页；习近平的镇压，第180页。另见社会动荡；天安门广场抗议活动

Document No. 9 (Central Committee 2013), 168, 177-78

文件第9号（中央委员会2013年），第168页，第177-178页

domestic security, 92-93, 98; Hu's strengthening of, 112-13; regime security as paramount concern of Xi, 167-68, 190; Xi's total control over, 172. See also repression

国内安全，92-93页，98页；胡锦涛加强对……的控制，112-113页；政权安全是习近平的首要关注点，167-168页，190页；习近平对……的全面控制，172页。另见镇压

dual circulation strategy, 209-11

双循环战略，209-11

dual-track pricing system, 46, 47, 51, 60, 70-71, 73

双轨定价系统，46、47、51、60、70-71、73



East Asian authoritarian model: demographic dividend and, 152; economic dynamism and, 8-9, 48, 80; loss of manufacturing companies, 146; repressive tactics of, 93

东亚威权模式：人口红利，152；经济活力，8-9、48、80；制造业企业流失，146；镇压策略，93

East Asian financial crisis (1997), 141, 238

东亚金融危机（1997），141，238

East China Sea Air Defense Identification Zone (ADIZ), 250

东海防空识别区（ADIZ），250

Eastern Europe's economic reform, 46-48, 60. See also former Soviet bloc

东欧经济改革，第46-48页、第60页。另见前苏联集团

economic growth of China, 3, 132-63; "big bang" and, 50, 70; coupled with one-party rule as Deng's strategy (see neo-authoritarian developmentalism); debt increase after global financial crisis, 161, 193-94, 198; demographic dividend, 152-55, 158, 163, 193; Deng vs. Chen on rate of, 25, 26; disconnect from democracy, 4; drivers of growth (consumption, investment, trade), 158-60, 160t; dual-track economy and, 46, 70-71; economic achievements, 133-35, 134t; hard-liners constraining in 1980s, 45-47, 49-50, 75; high savings and investment rates, 155-57; incremental capital output ratio and, 159; inevitable loss of momentum, 101, 102, 163, 193, 220; inflation of 1988 and, 37, 40, 75; infrastructure investment, 132, 136, 137, 157, 159, 210; investment-dependent, 103, 133, 159, 193, 210; learning-by-doing and avoiding costly mistakes, 46, 47, 58; liberating productivity, 47; local governments' increased autonomy and, 47; losing momentum, 14, 157-63; origins of experimentalism, 46-49; path dependence and, 13, 45, 132-33, 222; post-Tiananmen measures of hard-liners constraining, 76; rapid rise (1978-1989), 71-73, 133; real estate sector as domestic driver of, 102, 158, 194, 200-201, 201t; reform and Chinese miracle, 135-42, 242; stalled by fall of liberals in mid-1980s, 37, 39-40; sustainability of, 155, 157, 162, 242; total dependency ratio and, 153-54; virtuous cycle and, 156. See also end of China's economic miracle; foreign direct investment; foreign trade; private sector and privatization; state-owned enterprises; West, economic engagement with; World Trade Organization

中国经济增长，3，132-63；“大爆炸”式发展，50，70；邓小平的策略是实行一党专政（参见新威权发展主义）；全球金融危机后的债务增加，161，193-94，198；人口红利，152-55，158，163，193；邓小平与陈志远关于经济增长率的争论，25，26；与民主脱节，4；增长的驱动因素（消费、投资、贸易），158-60，160t；双轨制经济，46，70-71；经济成就，133-35，134t；20世纪80年代强硬派的制约，45-47，49-50，75；高储蓄率和投资率，155-57；增量资本产出比，159；势头不可避免的丧失，101、102、163、193、220；1988 年的通货膨胀，37、40、75；基础设施投资，132、136、137、157、159、210；投资依赖性，103、133、159、193、210；边做边学和避免代价高昂的错误，46、47、58；解放生产力，47；地方政府自主权的增强，47；势头丧失，14、157-63；实验主义的起源，46-49；路径依赖，13、45、132-33、222；天安门事件后强硬派的约束措施，76；快速增长（1978-1989），71-73，133；房地产行业作为国内经济增长的驱动力，102，158，194，200-201，201；改革与中国经济奇迹，135-142，242；20世纪80年代中期自由主义势力衰落导致经济停滞，37，39-40；经济的可持续性，155，157，162，242；总抚养比，153-154；良性循环，156。另见：中国经济奇迹的终结；外国直接投资；对外贸易；私营部门和私有化；国有企业；西方经济交往；世界贸易组织

economic stagnation, 11, 13, 45, 76, 192.

经济停滞，11、13、45、76、192。

See also stagnation in Hu Jintao era

另见胡锦涛时代的停滞

education: educational attainment,

教育：教育程度，

improvement in, 3, 96; international

改进，3，96；国际

education exchange programs, 229;

教育交流项目，229；

spending issues, 104, 105f, 107-8, 109f.

支出问题，104、105f、107-8、109f。

See also universities

另见大学

elites: co-optation of, 95-97, 128; corruption opportunities and, 121; degenerati creating opportunity for ruthless personalistic ruler, 129; Hu's socialist harmonious society providing stability, 109, 123; loss of security of political elites, 2, 11; in post-Tiananmen era, 83-88, 99, 167; power struggles and, 128, 254

精英：收买，95-97，128；腐败机会和，121；堕落分子为残暴的个人统治者创造机会，129；胡锦涛的社会主义和谐社会提供稳定，109，123；政治精英安全感的丧失，2，11；后天安门时代，83-88，99，167；权力斗争和，128，254

end of China's economic miracle, 14, 192-221; after-school coaching industry banned (2023), 216-17; aging population and, 194, 220; Ant Group IPO's cancellation, 216; Covid-19 pandemic coinciding with, 217-19; debt level of private sector and deleveraging campaign, 199-200, 215-16, 220, 259; decoupling of US and China's economies, 205, 207, 208, 242, 259; EU's derisking policy restricting trade and investment in China, 207-8, 221, 224, 252; excess industrial capacity, 197-98; FDI exit, 219; inevitable loss of momentum, 220; infrastructure investment and, 210; investment-dependent growth, 210; labor costs increasing, 194, 220; macroeconomic imbalances and, 197; "the new normal," 193, 195; platform economy, crackdown on, 216-17; private sector, Xi's policies on, 212-17, 259; problems Xi inherited upon coming to power, 193-95; productivity drop, 194; real estate market crash and, 162, 170, 195, 203-4, 219, 259; resistance to economic reform from interests benefiting from inefficiency, 192-93, 196; reversion to the mean and, 193; selfsufficiency as goal for Xi, 190, 209-10; sixty-point reform plan presented by Xi (2013), 195-96, 213; SOEs, Xi's policies on, 212-17; statism, revival of, 212-14; stimulus package in response to 2008 global financial crisis, debt increase due to, 193-94, 199, 259; stock market intervention, 214-15; supply-side reform, 197-200; US-China trade war's effect on, 208-9, 220-21; Xi's economic problems, 190-91, 195, 259; Xi's totalitarianism incompatible with pro-market reforms, 192, 196. See also US-China trade war

中国经济奇迹的终结，14，192-221；课后辅导行业被禁（2023年），216-17；人口老龄化，194，220；蚂蚁集团IPO取消，216；新冠疫情与……同时发生，217-19；私营部门债务水平和去杠杆化运动，199-200，215-16，220，259；中美经济脱钩，205，207，208，242，259；欧盟限制对华贸易和投资的去风险政策，207-8，221，224，252；工业产能过剩，197-98；外商直接投资撤出，219；势头不可避免的减弱，220；基础设施投资，210；投资依赖型增长，210；劳动力成本上升，194、220；宏观经济失衡，197；“新常态”，193、195；平台经济，打击，216-17；私营部门，习近平的政策，212-17、259；习近平上台时继承的问题，193-95；生产率下降，194；房地产市场崩盘，162、170、195、203-4、219、259；从低效中获益的利益集团对经济改革的抵制，192-93、196；均值回归，193；习近平以自给自足为目标，190、209-10；习近平提出的六十点改革方案（2013），195-96、213；国有企业，习近平的相关政策，212-217页；国家主义的复兴，212-214页；应对2008年全球金融危机的刺激计划，由此导致的债务增加，193-194页、199页、259页；股市干预，214-215页；供给侧改革，197-200页；中美贸易战的影响，208-209页、220-221页；习近平面临的经济问题，190-191页、195页、259页；习近平的极权主义与亲市场改革不相容，192页、196页。另见中美贸易战

entrepreneurship: illegal fund-raising charges against private entrepreneur, 118; micro service businesses, 63; rural, 52. See also private sector and privatization; township and village enterprises

创业：针对私营企业家的非法筹资指控，118；微型服务企业，63；农村，52。另见私营部门和私有化；乡镇和乡村企业。

environmental issues, 102, 103-4, 107, 107f, 110, 133; corruption in development of natural resources, 122; rights defense movement and, 115, 130

环境问题，第102、103-104、107、107f、110、133页；自然资源开发中的腐败问题，第122页；人权捍卫运动，第115、130页。

equity markets, 138-39

股票市场，138-39

ethnic minorities, oppression of, 2, 38, 110, 112, 130, 179, 183. See also Uighurs

少数民族，受压迫，2，38，110，112，130，179，183。另见维吾尔族

European Union (EU): Hu achieving friendly relations with, 244; trade deficit with China, 194; Ukraine-Russia war's effect on Chinese-EU relations, 207-8, 221, 224, 252

欧盟：胡锦涛与欧盟建立友好关系，244；对华贸易逆差，194；乌克兰-俄罗斯战争对中欧关系的影响，207-208、221、224、252

Evergrande (real estate developer), 203

恒大（房地产开发商），203

export-processing zones (EPZs), 56

出口加工区（EPZ），56



Falungong spiritual group, 94-95, 98, 112, 187

法轮功灵修团体，94-95、98、112、187

feudalism of CCP under Mao, 21

毛泽东时代的中国共产党封建主义，21

fiscal contracting, 136

财政契约，136

fiscal reform, 137-39, 141, 146, 162-63, 198

财政改革，第137-139页、第141页、第146页、第162-163页、第198页

food safety, 115-16

食品安全，115-16

forced evictions, 100, 110, 111

强制驱逐，100，110，111

Foreign-Capital Enterprises Law (1986), 55

外商投资企业法（1986年），第55条

foreign direct investment (FDI): after decoupling from the West, 208; amounts (1993-2012), 144f, 145; benefits of, 147; compared to China's internal rates of investment, 156; Deng's welcoming and inflow of (1980s), 4, 26, 45, 46, 53, 72; drop in 1987, 39; exit from China during Xi regime, 219; favorable tax treatment for, 57, 146; Japanese FDI in China, 228; key to rapid economic growth, 46, 147; know-how transfer resulting from, 148; legislation to attract, 54-56; post-WTO accession, 150-51; processing trade and, 148; restrictions on, 55; SEZs created to attract, 57, 145; specialized industrial areas and, 147; spillover effects, 147; Taiwanese FDI in China, 147, 239; US-China trade war and, 206; WTO entry stimulating, 101, 103

外国直接投资（FDI）：脱钩后，208；金额（1993-2012），144f，145；收益，147；与中国国内投资率相比，156；邓小平的欢迎和外国直接投资流入（20世纪80年代），4，26，45，46，53，72；1987年下降，39；习近平执政期间的外国直接投资撤出中国，219；对外国直接投资的优惠税收待遇，57，146；日本对华直接投资，228；快速经济增长的关键，46，147；由此产生的技术转让，148；吸引外国直接投资的立法，54-56；加入世贸组织后，150-51；加工贸易和，148；对外国直接投资的限制，55；为吸引外国直接投资而设立的经济特区，57，145；专业化产业区及，147；溢出效应，147；台湾对华直接投资，147，239；中美贸易战及，206；加入世贸组织带来的刺激作用，101，103

foreign policy: aggressiveness of, 2, 4, 131;

外交政策：侵略性，2，4，131；

Belt and Road Initiative as economic means to gain global influence, 250; Deng prioritizing Western economic partnership, 13, 26-27, 223; Deng vs.

“一带一路”倡议作为获取全球影响力的经济手段，250；邓小平优先考虑与西方的经济伙伴关系，13，26-27，223；邓小平与……

Chen on, 26-27; Hu conforming to Deng and later changing direction, 244-45; Hu Yaobang's liberal hand in, 38; Mao's isolationism and, 53, 58, 228; propaganda

陈，第26-27页；胡耀邦顺从邓小平，后改变方向，第244-245页；胡耀邦的自由主义干预，第38页；毛泽东的孤立主义，第53、58、228页；宣传

activities overseas, 245; soft power, use of, 245; of Xi, 131, 165, 187, 247. See also new cold war; West, economic engagement with

海外活动，第245页；软实力运用，第245页；习近平，第131、165、187、247页。另见新冷战；西方经济交往

foreign trade: China as market for Western goods and services, 147; contribution to GDP growth, 160t; Deng's reforms, 58-60; dismantling monopolies of FTOs, 58-59; exchange reserves from, 134; exports and trade surpluses, 103, 134; in foreign merchandise, 4; Foreign Trade Law (1994), 148-49; fraying relationships due to trade deficits, 194-95, 204; golden age of US-China relations, 227; manufactured goods, expansion of, 60; Mao's isolationist policies and, 53; overall trade not affected by US-China trade war, 206, 206t; piecemeal reforms of, 47; processing trade, 148; promotion of, 46; rapid growth, 59t, 59-60, 133, 134t, 149, 149t; Russia as trading partner, 249; tariff rates, 60, 148; tax incentives, 59, 60. See also US-China trade war; World Trade Organization

对外贸易：中国作为西方商品和服务的市场，147；对GDP增长的贡献，160吨；邓小平的改革，58-60；打破自由贸易协定的垄断，58-59；外汇储备，134；出口和贸易顺差，103，134；外国商品，4；《对外贸易法》（1994年），148-149；贸易逆差导致关系紧张，194-195，204；美中关系的黄金时代，227；制成品，扩张，60；毛泽东的孤立主义政策，53；总体贸易未受美中贸易战影响，206，206吨；零散的改革，47；加工贸易，148；促进，46；快速增长，59吨，59-60吨，133吨，134吨，149吨，149吨；俄罗斯作为贸易伙伴，249；关税税率，60，148；税收优惠，59，60。另见美中贸易战；世界贸易组织

Foreign Trade Law (1994), 148

对外贸易法（1994年），第148页

foreign trade organizations (FTOs), 58-59

对外贸易组织（FTO），58-59

former Soviet bloc: economic decline in transition period, 62; economic reform of, 46-48; price reform of, 70; state-owned enterprises (SOEs) in, 60, 62, 67; totalitarianism rejected in, 7

前苏联集团：转型期经济衰退，62；经济改革，46-48；价格改革，70；国有企业，60、62、67；极权主义被摒弃，7

foundational institutions of totalitarianism, 12, 13, 23, 43, 73, 94, 165, 187, 254

极权主义的基础制度，12、13、23、43、73、94、165、187、254

"Four Cardinal Principles" (Deng), 5, 34, 81, 90, 188

《四大基本原则》（邓），5、34、81、90、188

Fu Zhenghua, 172

Fu Zhenghua, 172

Fuyao Industrial Glass Group, 52, 143

福耀工业玻璃集团，52，143



Gang of Four, 3, 16

四人帮，3，16

General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), 149-50, 229. See also World Trade Organization

《关税及贸易总协定》（GATT），第149-150页、第229页。另见世界贸易组织。

geti jingji (individually operated businesses), 63-64

个体经营，63-64

global financial crisis (2008), 159; China's stimulus package as response to, 102, 158, 160-62, 163, 193, 199, 212, 245, 254; consequences to debt level, 161, 193-94, 198; Hu breaking with post-Tiananmen policy of strategic caution after, 224; opportunity created by, 165, 254; US and Europe facing economic consequences of, 245, 248

全球金融危机（2008），159；中国应对危机的刺激方案，102、158、160-162、163、193、199、212、245、254；对债务水平的影响，161、193-194、198；胡锦涛打破天安门事件后的战略谨慎政策，224；由此创造的机遇，165、254；美国和欧洲面临的经济后果，245、248

globalization, 3-5, 145-48; Asian powerhouse economies and, 9; China's ability to capitalize on, 132, 152, 163; China's foreign trade and, 58, 206; China's integration into, 16, 46, 72, 82, 98, 131, 135, 150; China's loss of linkages, 221, 225, 259; economic disruption of Covid-19 pandemic, 207; Jiang's success based on, 241; post-Tiananmen order and, 241; SEZs setting example for China's future integration into, 58; Xi maintaining ties to global economy, 211. See also World Trade Organization

全球化，第3-5页，第145-148页；亚洲强国经济，第9页；中国利用全球化的能力，第132页，第152页，第163页；中国的对外贸易，第58页，第206页；中国融入全球经济，第16页，第46页，第72页，第82页，第98页，第131页，第135页，第150页；中国失去联系，第221页，第225页，第259页；新冠疫情造成的经济冲击，第207页；江泽民的成功基于，第241页；后天安门时代的秩序，第241页；经济特区为中国未来融入全球经济树立榜样，第58页；习近平维持与全球经济的联系，第211页。另见世界贸易组织

Golden Shield project, 93, 112, 182

金盾项目，93、112、182

Gorbachev, Mikhail, 7, 41-42, 82, 230

戈尔巴乔夫，米哈伊尔，7，41-42，82，230

governance, party rules to set boundaries on, 111. See also mandatory retirements; term limits

治理、政党规则，111.另见强制退休；任期限制

gradualism, 7, 45, 48, 50, 67, 70

渐进主义，7，45，48，50，67，70

Great Firewall of China, 93, 112

中国防火长城，93，112

Great Leap Forward, communes' role in, 51 "Guidelines on Political Life in the Party" (Central Committee 1980), 84

大跃进，人民公社在其中的作用，《党的政治生活指导原则》（中央委员会，1980年），第51页，第84页

"Guiding Principles for Inner-Party Political Life" (Deng 1980), 23-24, 175

《党内政治生活指导原则》（邓小平，1980），第23-24页，第175页

Gulf War (1990-1991), 236

海湾战争（1990-1991），236

Guo Boxiong, 170, 171

Guo Boxiong, 170, 171



hard-liners of 1980s: balance of power favoring, 6, 16, 43, 188; in charge of party's ideology and propaganda, 34; communist system, advocating return to, 12, 74; deaths ending opposition to neo-authoritarianism, 83; Deng's alignment with, 34, 39-40, 43, 233, 253-54; Deng's post-Tiananmen dealings with, 75-76; elevation at Thirteenth Party Congress (1987), 39; marginalized after Soviet collapse, 79, 81-83, 256; one-party rule, preservation of, 19, 20-21, 253-54; only Li Peng left in top leadership of early 1990s, 78, 80; opposed to reform and opening, 15-16, 25-27, 39, 45-47, 49-50, 81, 253; private sector's rise opposed by, 63; strengthened by fall of Hu Yaobang, 37-39, 43; Zhao Ziyang as target of, 39-40, 42.

20世纪80年代的强硬派：权力平衡有利于……，6、16、43、188；负责党的意识形态和宣传，34；共产主义制度，主张回归……，12、74；死亡结束了对新威权主义的反对，83；邓小平与……结盟，34、39-40、43、233、253-54；邓小平在天安门事件后与……的交往，75-76；在十三大（1987年）上获得晋升，39；苏联解体后被边缘化，79、81-83、256；一党专政，维护……，19、20-21、253-54；20世纪90年代初，最高领导层只剩下李鹏，78、80；反对改革开放，15-16、25-27、39、45-47、49-50、81、253；反对私营部门的崛起，63；因胡耀邦下台而加强，37-39、43；以赵紫阳为目标，39-40、42。



See also Chen Yun; command

另见陈云；命令

economy favored by hard-liners; Deng Xiaoping healthcare: corruption in purchase and sale of medicine, 122; spending issues, 104, 104f, 108, 108f, 109f

强硬派青睐的经济；邓小平的医疗保健：药品买卖中的腐败，第122页；支出问题，第104、104f、108、108f、109f页

hepatitis-B positive population, discrimination against, 115

乙肝病毒感染者群体遭受歧视，115

historicalnihilism,167,178

历史虚无主义，167，178

Hong Kong: anti-extradition movement 186; autonomy of, 184; Chinese entrepreneurs in, 146; Deng's agreement with UK for return of, 184; as economic success of globalization, 9; FDI flowing from, 147, 228; National Security Law and, 2, 184-85; "one country, two systems" governance, 2, 184-86; prodemocracy activists in, 185; repression in, 179, 183; "round-tripping practice" and, 147

香港：反修例运动 186；自治权 184；中国企业家在香港的情况 146；邓小平与英国就香港回归达成的协议 184；作为全球化的经济成功案例 9；来自香港的外国直接投资 147、228；国家安全法及相关政策 2、184-185；“一国两制”治理 2、184-186；香港的民主活动人士 185；香港的镇压 179、183；“往返实践”及相关政策 147

household responsibility system, 50. See also agricultural reforms: decollectivization housing. See real estate sector Hu Chunhua, 1, 177

家庭联产承包责任制，50。另见农业改革：住房非集体化。参见房地产部门，胡春华，1，177

Hu Jintao, 14, 101-31; agricultural tax abolished by, 106; balance of power and, 168-69; Bo seeking to become successor to, 126-27; "China threat theory," need to counter, 243; choice of successor to, 88, 123, 126; Communist Youth League faction and, 123-25; compared to Xi, 165, 167, 173, 178, 245; "core leader" moniker and, 103, 174; corruption and, 101, 119-23; debt to GDP ratio and, 194; Deng's choice to succeed Jiang, 80, 87, 88, 125; economic downturn and, 158-59, 163, 254; education spending issues and, 104, 105f, 107-8; environmental protection and, 102, 103-4, 107, 107f; foreign policy of, 244-45; global financial crisis and, 224; healthcare spending issues and, 104, 104f; inequality issues and, 101-2, 104, 108-9; Jiang's influence and, 102-3, 105, 108-9; as Li Keqiang's patron, 125-26; marginal policy changes and, 103; migrant tax and mistreatment addressed by, 106-7, 114; neo-authoritarianism of, 254; "peaceful rise" narrative of, 243-44; popular reforms initiated by Hu, 106; public health infrastructure, creation of, 105; purge of rival by, 84, 123, 124, 126;

胡锦涛，14，101-31；农业税被废除，106；权力平衡与，168-69；薄熙来寻求接班人，126-27；“中国威胁论”，需要应对，243；接班人的选择，88，123，126；共青团派系与，123-25；与习近平的比较，165，167，173，178，245；“核心领导人”称号与，103，174；腐败与，101，119-23；债务占GDP比率与，194；邓小平选择江泽民接班人，80，87，88，125；经济衰退与，158-59，163，254；教育支出问题，104、105f、107-8；环境保护，102、103-4、107、107f；外交政策，244-45；全球金融危机，224；医疗保健支出问题，104、104f；不平等问题，101-2、104、108-9；江泽民的影响，102-3、105、108-9；作为李克强的赞助人，125-26；边际政策变化，103；移民税收和虐待问题，106-7、114；新威权主义，254；“和平崛起”叙事，243-44；胡锦涛发起的民众改革，106；公共卫生基础设施建设，105；清除竞争对手，84、123、124、126；

Hu Jintao (continued) removed from stage at twentieth CCP Congress, 1, 2; repression tactics, 178, 180; retirement of, 88; rights defense movement and, 114-19; rulemaking for party administration enacted by, 85; SARS crisis and, 105-6; "Scientific Outlook of Development" agenda, 105; selective repression and, 113; socialist harmonious society and, 105-9, 164; SOEs, failure to reform, 109, 220; stability and collective leadership of, 86, 102, 164; taoguan yanghui and, 243-47; visit to Japan, 228; as weakest Chinese leader in post-Mao era, 125-26; weaknesses of neo-authoritarianism and, 86, 98, 101; WTO entry and, 101, 103, 109; Xi dismantling power network of, 169, 177. See also stagnation in Hu Jintao era Hu Qiaomu, 34, 35, 49

胡锦涛（续）在中共二十大上被赶下台，1、2；镇压策略，178、180；退休，88；维权运动，114-119；党政管理规则制定，85；非典危机，105-106；“科学发展观”议程，105；选择性镇压，113；社会主义和谐社会，105-109、164；国有企业改革失败，109、220；稳定与集体领导，86、102、164；桃冠杨辉，243-247；访日，228；作为后毛泽东时代最弱的中国领导人，125-126；新威权主义的弱点，86、98、101；加入世贸组织和、101、103、109；习近平拆除权力网络, 169, 177。另见胡锦涛时代的停滞胡乔木, 34, 35, 49

Hu Qili, 124

Hu Qili, 124

Hu Yaobang: agricultural reform supported by, 49-50; attacks by Hu Qiaomu and Deng Liquon on, 34; background of, 18, 37; Communist Youth League and, 125; death of (1989), 40; debate on alienation under socialism and, 35; Deng's dismissal of (1987), 16, 20, 33, 36-38, 42, 86, 98, 188, 256; Deng's reform initiatives weakened by fall of, 39, 46; Deng's relationship with, 27, 30; hard-liners strengthened by fall of, 36, 37-39, 43; Hua's ouster by Deng and, 18, 37; human rights in 1980s and, 230; as liberal reformer, 5, 15-16, 19, 21, 32; as party chief, 3; visit to Japan, 228

胡耀邦：农业改革得到支持，49-50；胡巧木和邓立群攻击，34；背景，18，37；共青团和，125；逝世（1989年），40；社会主义下的异化辩论和，35；邓小平解职（1987年），16，20，33，36-38，42，86，98，188，256；邓小平的改革举措因的倒台而削弱，39，46；邓小平与的关系，27，30；强硬派因的倒台而加强，36，37-39，43；华被邓小平赶下台和，18，37；20世纪80年代的人权和，230；作为自由改革者，5、15-16、19、21、32；作为党魁，3；访问日本，228

Hua Guofeng: agricultural reform opposed by, 49; Democracy Wall movement weakening rule of, 34; as Mao's successor, 17; ouster of, 3, 15, 17, 18, 37; visit to Japan, 228

华国锋：反对农业改革，49年；民主墙运动削弱统治，34年；作为毛泽东的接班人，17年；罢免，3年、15年、17年、18年、37年；访问日本，228年

Huawei, 209, 252

华为，209，252

Human Development Index rating of Hu's socialist harmonious society, 108, 109f

胡锦涛的社会主义和谐社会的人类发展指数排名为108，109f

human rights, as key issue for West, 28, 147, 207, 223-24, 232, 234

人权是西方关注的关键问题，第28、147、207、223-224、232、234页

human rights activists, 114-19, 130, 179, 180-81

人权活动家，114-119、130、179、180-181

Huntington,Samuel,43

亨廷顿，塞缪尔，43

hybrid economy, 45; phase 1 (1979-1983), 45-46; phase 2 (1984-1989), 46

混合经济，45；第一阶段（1979-1983年），45-46；第二阶段（1984-1989年），46



ideological indoctrination, 1, 128; Document No. 9 ("Communique on the Current State of the Ideological Sphere" 2013), 168, 177-78; Stalinist official ideology, 265n33; Xi reviving, 166, 167. See also patriotic education campaign

意识形态灌输，第1、128页；第9号文件（《关于当前意识形态领域的公报》，2013年），第168、177-178页；斯大林主义官方意识形态，第265页脚注33；习近平复兴，第166、167页。另见爱国主义教育运动

incremental capital output ratio (ICOR), 159

增量资本产出率（ICOR），159

India-China relations, 238

印度-中国关系，238

Indonesia, 81, 141

印度尼西亚，81，141

inefficiency: capital-intensive heavy industry and, 58; China's response to US-China trade war resulting in, 212; Deng frustrated by, 29; dual-track transition and, 73; interests benefiting from, 192-93, 196; of partial reform economy, 130; of SOEs, 46, 61-62, 67, 102, 140, 162, 163, 214; of Soviet regime prior to fall, 82; supply-side reform to counter, 197-200

效率低下：资本密集型重工业及，58；中国对中美贸易战的回应，导致，212；邓小平感到沮丧，29；双轨转型及，73；受益于，192-93，196；部分改革经济，130；国有企业，46，61-62，67，102，140，162，163，214；苏联解体前的政权，82；为应对而进行的供给侧改革，197-200

inequality issues: Hu's attempts to address, 102, 104, 108-9; income inequality, 104, 107, 107f, 133; likely to impact regime's support, 100, 101; socioeconomic inequality, 101, 190; Xi's ban on after-school coaching industry to address, 216-17

不平等问题：胡锦涛试图解决的问题，102、104、108-9；收入不平等，104、107、107f、133；可能影响政权支持率，100、101；社会经济不平等，101、190；习近平禁止课外辅导行业以解决的问题，216-17

inner-party democracy,23-24,30,42,165 175,189

党内民主，23-24,30,42,165,175,189

institutional reforms (1980s), 21-25; benefits of, 21-22; decision-making power kept by party elders, 24-25; failure to create third-party enforcement, 24-25, 42; loopholes and flaws in, 24, 189; vagueness and insistence on maintaining party's power, 22-23

制度改革（20世纪80年代），第21-25页；改革的益处，第21-22页；决策权掌握在党内元老手中，第24-25页；未能建立第三方执法机制，第24-25页、第42页；改革中的漏洞和缺陷，第24页、第189页；对维护党的权力态度含糊不清且过于坚持，第22-23页。

insurance industry reform, 137-38, 146

保险业改革，137-38，146

intellectual property rights and theft, 55, 146, 152, 204

知识产权与盗窃，55、146、152、204

intelligentsia, 20, 21; co-optation to ensure support of, 95, 97; conservative intelligentsia's debate of neo-authoritarianism, 81; Deng cracking down periodically on, 36; Hu Yaobang favored by, 38; in liberal wave of 1980s, 30, 32, 33, 35-36

知识分子，20、21；为确保支持而进行的拉拢，95、97；保守派知识分子关于新威权主义的辩论，81；邓小平周期性镇压，36；胡耀邦受到青睐，38；在20世纪80年代的自由主义浪潮中，30、32、33、35-36

International Monetary Fund, 162, 229, 250

国际货币基金组织，162、229、250

international NGOs, 179, 182, 229

国际非政府组织，179、182、229

internet: libel as criminal offense, 179; pervasive access to, 115; rights defense movement using, 115; state control of, 187; surveillance, 93, 113; Xi's new laws on use of, 179. See also social media Iraq invasion by US (2003), 233, 243, 249, 254

互联网：诽谤罪，第179页；普遍访问，第115页；维权运动利用互联网，第115页；国家控制，第187页；监控，第93页、第113页；习近平关于使用互联网的新法律，第179页。另见社交媒体；美国入侵伊拉克（2003年），第233页、第243页、第249页、第254页。



Japan: Chinese trade and investment with, 8, 53; Deng improving economic ties with, 226, 227-28, 230; dispute with China over Senkaku/Diaoyu Islands, 228, 238, 245-46, 250; FDI flow to China, 228; Hu Yaobang's policy on, 38; loss of competitiveness in manufacturing sector, 146; North Korea nuclear development and, 244; restricting flow of technology to China, 221; security dilemma with, 236

日本：与中国的贸易和投资，第8、53页；邓小平改善与日本的经济关系，第226、227-228、230页；与中国在钓鱼岛/尖阁诸岛问题上的争端，第228、238、245-246、250页；流入中国的外国直接投资，第228页；胡耀邦的政策，第38页；制造业竞争力下降，第146页；朝鲜核发展，第244页；限制技术流入中国，第221页；与日本的安全困境，第236页。

Jiang Zemin, 14; balance of power and, 168-69; blamed for stagnation under Hu, 102-3; Central Military Commission chairmanship, retaining after retirement, 88, 102-3; choice as leader, 75; compared to Xi, 167, 178; "core leader" moniker and, 103, 174; Deng's choice of Hu Jintao to succeed, 80, 87, 88; Deng's dissatisfaction with, 78; first party chief with college education, 83; globalization and, 241-42; Hu and Wen countering influence of, 104; inability to control hard-liners, 75; influence after retirement, 102-3, 105, 108-9, 123, 126, 244; modernization of military by, 236; neo-authoritarianism of, 83, 128, 224, 254; patriotic education campaign and, 89; PSC expanded with close associates by, 102, 244, 28on1; purge of rival by, 84, 98; repression tactics, 93, 178, 180; rulemaking for party administration enacted by, 84-85; ruling the country according to law slogan of, 115; Russia, strategic partnership with, 237; Russian partnership with Yeltsin, 237; selective repression and, 95-96, 113; Shanghai Gang and, 123; sharing power with Li Peng, Qiao Shi, and Zhu Rongji, 87; stability and collective leadership of, 86; supporting and implementing Deng's agenda, 78, 80, 84, 101, 235; Taiwan and, 240; "Three Represents" theory of, 96, 145, 235; US relations stabilized with China, 234-35, 248; WTO accession and, 150; Xi dismantling power network of, 169, 171; Xi's selection as Hu's successor, 124

江泽民，14；权力平衡与，168-69；被指责为胡锦涛时期停滞不前的原因，102-3；中央军委主席，退休后继续留任，88，102-3；被选为领导人，75；与习近平的比较，167，178；“核心领导人”的称号与，103，174；邓小平选择胡锦涛接班，80，87，88；邓小平对……的不满，78；第一位拥有大学学历的党的总书记，83；全球化与，241-42；胡锦涛和温家宝对抗……的影响，104；无法控制强硬派，75；退休后的影响力，102-3，105，108-9，123，126，244；……对军队的现代化，236；新威权主义，83、128、224、254；爱国主义教育运动，89；党政委及其亲信扩大，102、244、28on1；清洗对手，84、98；镇压策略，93、178、180；党政管理规则制定，84-85；依法治国的口号，115；与俄罗斯建立战略伙伴关系，237；俄罗斯与叶利钦的伙伴关系，237；选择性镇压，95-96、113；上海帮，123；与李鹏、乔石、朱镕基分享权力，87；稳定和集体领导，86；支持和实施邓小平的议程，78、80、84、101、235；台湾及，240；“三代表”理论，96、145、235；美中关系稳定，234-35、248；加入世贸组织及，150；习近平拆解权力网络，169、171；习近平被选为胡锦涛的接班人，124

joint ventures: amendments to laws on (1990s), 146; foreign investor law (1979), 54-55; private sector's right to enter into, 64; Shanghai-Volkswagen, 26-27

合资企业：相关法律修正案（1990年代），第146页；外国投资者法（1979年），第54-55页；私营部门的合资权，第64页；上海大众，第26-27页



Khrushchev,Nikita,32

赫鲁晓夫，尼基塔，32岁

Kornai, Janos, 48

科尔奈，亚诺什，48

Kuomintang (KMT), 238, 240

国民党（KMT），238，240



labor disputes and labor rights, 110; employment discrimination, 115; repression of labor organizers, 181; slave labor, 116; worker unrest (late 1990s) from bankrupt SOEs, 98

劳资纠纷和劳动权利，110；就业歧视，115；镇压劳工组织者，181；奴工，116；破产国有企业引发的工人骚乱（20世纪90年代末），98

labor force: advantage of China, 8, 58, 132, 135, 145-47; declining pool of cheap labor, 194, 220; demographic dividend and, 152-55, 158; employment in private sector vs. SOEs and collectively owned firms, 143-44, 144t; processing trade and, 148; wage increases, 194; youth unemployment, 195

劳动力：中国的优势，第8、58、132、135、145-147页；廉价劳动力资源减少，第194、220页；人口红利，第152-155、158页；私营部门就业与国有企业和集体所有制企业就业对比，第143-144、144页；加工贸易，第148页；工资增长，第194页；青年失业，第195页

land-based fiscal system, 137, 199

陆基财政体系，137，199

land reform (Xi's sixty-point plan 2013), 196

土地改革（习近平2013年六十点计划），196

land seizure, 100, 110, 111, 118

土地征用，100、110、111、118

Lardy, Nicholas, 158

拉迪，尼古拉斯，158

law enforcement: coercive apparatus investment for, 92; funding from economic boom of 1990s, 94; People's Armed Police (PAP), 93; police force size, 93; urban mobile antiriot forces, 92

执法：强制机制投资，92；20世纪90年代经济繁荣带来的资金，94；人民武装警察（PAP），93；警力规模，93；城市机动防暴部队，92

lawyers and legal profession: advocating for the voiceless, 116-17; high-profile sensitive cases, 106-7, 117-19; illegal fund-raising charges against private entrepreneur and, 118; law professor fired for posting critical online article, 181; public interest litigation, 115-16; rebuilding and training of, 28, 99; repression of human rights lawyers, 180-81; rights defense movement and, 114-19, 180-81; Sanlu poisonous baby formula case (2008), 115; Shaanbei oilfield litigation (2003) and, 118; slave labor case (2007), 116; Taishi village incident (2005) and, 117-18

律师和法律职业：为弱势群体发声，116-117页；备受瞩目的敏感案件，106-107页，117-119页；针对私营企业家的非法筹款指控，118页；法学教授因发表批评性网络文章而被解雇，181页；公益诉讼，115-116页；重建与培训，28页，99页；对人权律师的镇压，180-181页；维权运动，114-119页，180-181页；三鹿毒奶粉案（2008年），115页；陕北油田诉讼案（2003年），118页；奴工案（2007年），116页；太石村事件（2005年），117-18页。

leadership succession: degeneration creating opportunity for ruthless personalistic ruler, 129; Hu as Jiang Zemin's successor, 80, 87, 88, 125; Jiang

领导层更迭：衰落为残暴的个人主义统治者创造机会，129；胡锦涛作为江泽民的接班人，80、87、88、125；江

leadership succession (continued)

领导层继任（续）

Zemin as successor of Deng, 74-75; law of negative selection, 129; same procedures in place from 1979 through 2012, 187, 189; Xi Jinping chosen as successor to Hu, 88, 109, 123, 126, 168, 176, 254-55; Xi preventing designation of potential successor, 177, 259

泽民作为邓小平的接班人，74-75页；负向选择定律，129页；1979年至2012年沿用相同程序，187页、189页；习近平被选为胡锦涛的接班人，88页、109页、123页、126页、168页、176页、254-255页；习近平阻止指定潜在接班人，177页、259页。

Lee Teng-hui, 91, 239-40

Lee Teng-hui, 91, 239-40

leftism and new left, 142; Xi's ultra-leftism, 166

左翼思想和新左翼，第142页；习近平的极左思想，第166页

legal reform and modernization, 84, 99; for foreign investment, 28; opening of legal arena to human rights and rule of law challenges, 118-19

法律改革和现代化，第84、99页；外国投资，第28页；开放法律领域以应对人权和法治挑战，第118-119页

legitimacy. See regime legitimacy and performance legitimacy

合法性。参见政权合法性和政绩合法性。

Lenin,Vladimir,45,167

列宁，弗拉基米尔，45岁，167

Leninist party-state, 7, 8, 12; Chen Yun favoring orthodoxy of, 19; Deng favoring but with different economic strategy, 19, 257; as pillar of totalitarianism, 187, 255; reducing power of, 42; SEZs and, 57; weakening control of economy, 129; Xi shoring up, 196-97, 255, 257

列宁主义党国，7、8、12；陈云倾向于正统，19；邓小平倾向于但采取不同的经济战略，19、257；作为极权主义的支柱，187、255；削弱权力，42；经济特区和，57；削弱对经济的控制，129；习近平加强，196-97、255、257

LewisTurning Point,154,220

刘易斯转折点，154,220

Li Keqiang, 109, 124-26, 129, 177

Li Keqiang, 109, 124-26, 129, 177

Li Peng, 39, 40, 41, 75-76, 78, 80, 87, 135

Li Peng, 39, 40, 41, 75-76, 78, 80, 87, 135

Li Ruihuan, 87

Li Ruihuan, 87

Li Xiannian, 49

Li Xiannian, 49

Li Zhanshu, 1, 177

Li Zhanshu, 1, 177

liangjian (get-tough-on-dissent approach), 178-83

两建（严厉打击异议），178-83

liberalism (1980s), 2, 5, 14-44, 253; accountable system of governance proposed, 29-32; agricultural reforms, 25, 50; bourgeois liberalization, 5, 20, 25, 35-40; cadre management system and, 21-22; civil society's enforcement of accountability, 25; constant economic and political turmoil, 15; culture fever and, 33, 43; "democracy in the party" encouraged by Deng, 23; Deng's institutional reforms, 21-25; enlightenment movement of liberal wave of 1980s, 33; first phase (1979-1986), 15-16; intelligentsia's support for, 20; lack of political significance, 2-3, 9, 20, 253; legacy of reform from, 135; political support for, 20; purge and decisive defeat by Deng, 9, 12, 15, 16, 98, 256; rule of law and, 21; second phase (1987-1988), 16. See also Hu Yaobang; prodemocracy movement; Zhao Ziyang

自由主义（20世纪80年代），2、5、14-44、253；提出的问责制治理体系，29-32；农业改革，25、50；资产阶级自由化，5、20、25、35-40；干部管理制度和，21-22；公民社会对问责制的执行，25；持续的经济和政治动荡，15；文化热潮和，33、43；邓小平鼓励的“党内民主”，23；邓小平的制度改革，21-25；20世纪80年代自由主义浪潮的启蒙运动，33；第一阶段（1979-1986），15-16；知识分子的支持，20；缺乏政治意义，2-3、9、20、253；改革的遗产，135；政治支持，20；邓小平的清洗和决定性失败，9、12、15、16、98、256；法治，21；第二阶段（1987-1988），16。另见胡耀邦；民主运动；赵紫阳

liberalism nonexistent after 1980s, 164, 177

1980年代后自由主义不复存在，164，177

lifetime tenure, end of. See mandatory retirements

终身任期结束。参见强制退休。

Lin Biao, 86, 171

Lin Biao, 86, 171

Ling Jihua, 126, 170

Ling Jihua, 126, 170

Liu He, 197, 209-10

刘贺，197，209-10

Liu Shaoqi, 18, 86

Liu Shaoqi, 18, 86

local government: debt load of, 137, 194, 198; FDI projects allowed by, 146; financing vehicles (LGFVs), 162, 198; fiscal reform (Xi's sixty-point plan 2013) and, 196; land-based fiscal system and, 137, 199; local protectionism and, 136; SASAC's role in, 140; surplus revenues retained by, 136; tax system and, 136

地方政府：债务负担，137、194、198；允许的外商直接投资项目，146；融资工具（LGFV），162、198；财政改革（习近平2013年六十点计划）和，196；以土地为基础的财政体系和，137、199；地方保护主义和，136；国资委的作用，140；盈余收入的留存，136；税收制度和，136

low profile dictum of Deng. See taoguan yanghui

low profile dictum of Deng. See taoguan yanghui

Lu Wei, 180

Lu Wei, 180

Luo Gan, 112

Luo Gan, 112



macroeconomic management, 71, 84, 158; global financial crisis and, 161; imbalances and, 158, 163, 193-94, 197, 219-20

宏观经济管理，71、84、158；全球金融危机，161；失衡，158、163、193-94、197、219-220

"Made in China 2025" as part of high-tech self-sufficiency program, 214, 216

“中国制造2025”是高科技自给自足计划的一部分，214，216

Malaysia, 56, 81

马来西亚，56，81

mandatory retirements: accelerating elite circulation, 85-86; appointment of retired officials to local congresses and advisory bodies, 86; Deng instituting, 2, 16, 21-22, 23, 42, 188; exemption of most senior leaders, 24, 42; Veteran Cadres Bureau to provide services to retired officials, 86; Xi ignoring for himself and his followers, 177

强制退休：加快精英循环，85-86页；任命退休官员进入地方代表大会和咨询机构，86页；邓小平的制度，2、16、21-22、23、42、188页；大多数高级领导人的豁免，24、42页；老干部局为退休官员提供服务，86页；习近平为自己及其追随者忽视了这一点，177页。

manufacturing: China as world's largest producer, 3; excess industrial capacity, 197-98; foreign trade of manufactured goods, growth of, 60; labor force in, 135, 144; processing trade and, 148; relocating to Southeast Asia, 207

制造业：中国是世界最大的生产国，3；工业产能过剩，197-98；制成品对外贸易增长，60；劳动力，135，144；加工贸易，148；迁往东南亚，207

Mao Zedong and Maoist era, 5; absence of age and term limits blocking careers of younger officials, 86; accelerated economic development of Deng as response to, 79; Bo using Maoist symbols in campaign to be Hu's successor, 127; campaign against Deng, 37; demographic dividend and, 152; Deng advocating reaffirmance of positive aspects of, 34; Deng and liberals trying to repair damage inflicted by, 19, 43, 225, 253; as deviation from Marxism, 33; discrediting as guiding political doctrine, 9, 18, 23; economic mismanagement of, 45, 47, 253; exposure of Chinese people's trauma and suffering under, 32; Hua's reliance on, 18; isolationism of, 53, 58, 228; lawlessness of, 28; neo-authoritarianism differentiated from, 265n33; Nixon's opening of China and, 225; paternalism and, 21; personalistic rule of, 23, 83; Selected Letters, 176; Selected Works, 176; social elites and, 95; widow of Mao, in Gang of Four, 3, 16; Xi's endorsement of, 167, 254. See also Cultural Revolution market economy: banking reform and, 138; Deng's pro-market reforms, 222, 253; economic reforms of 1980s creating foundations of, 98; full embrace, not possible due to one-party rule, 45; Hu's failure to implement, 192; legitimatized by CCP Center's Resolution (1993), 84; sixty-point reform plan presented by Xi (2013), 195; trapped transition of neo-authoritarian regime, 192; WTO accession and, 151; Xi's totalitarianism incompatible with pro-market reforms, 192, 196. See also foreign trade; private sector and privatization; special economic zones

毛泽东和毛泽东时代，5；缺乏年龄和任期限制阻碍年轻官员的职业发展，86；邓小平为应对……而加速经济发展，79；薄熙来在竞选胡锦涛接班人时使用毛泽东符号，127；反对邓小平的运动，37；人口红利和……，152；邓小平主张重申……的积极方面，34；邓小平和自由派试图修复……造成的损害，19、43、225、253；……作为对马克思主义的偏离，33；……作为指导性政治理论的信誉受损，9、18、23；……的经济管理不善，45、47、253；……暴露中国人民在……下的创伤和苦难，32；华春莹对……的依赖，18；……的孤立主义，53、58、228；……的无法无天，28；新威权主义与……的区别，265n33；尼克松对中国的开放，225；家长式作风，21；个人主义统治，23，83；《书信选》，176；《文选》，176；社会精英，95；毛泽东遗孀，《四人帮》，3，16；习近平对……的支持，167，254。另见文化大革命市场经济：银行改革，138；邓小平的亲市场改革，222，253；20世纪80年代的经济改革奠定了……的基础，98；全面拥抱，由于一党专政而不可能，45；胡锦涛未能实施，192；由中共中央决议（1993年）合法化，84；习近平提出的六十点改革方案（2013年），195；新威权政权转型困境，第192页；加入世贸组织，第151页；习近平的极权主义与亲市场改革不相容，第192页、第196页。另见对外贸易；私营部门和私有化；经济特区

Marx, Karl, 33

马克思，卡尔，33岁

Marxism-Leninism, 5

马克思列宁主义，5

Marxist students advocating for labor rights, 181

马克思主义学生倡导劳工权利，181

mass incidents. See social unrest

群体性事件。参见社会动荡

mass surveillance, 13, 93, 112-13, 182-83

大规模监控，13，93，112-113，182-183

media: off-limits for foreign investment, 55; in patriotic education campaign, 89-90; state control of, 187. See also censorship

媒体：禁止外商投资，第55页；在爱国主义教育运动中，第89-90页；国家控制，第187页。另见审查制度

meritocracy, 85

精英制度，85

Mexico's Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI), 6

墨西哥革命制度党（PRI），6

migrant tax and mistreatment based on "Procedures for Detaining and the

根据“拘留程序和”对移民征税和虐待

Repatriation of Vagrants and Beggars in Cities," 106-7, 114

城市流浪者和乞丐的遣返”，106-7，114

military and security forces: antiriot forces, 92-93; control of, 6, 8, 13, 43; defense budget, 237t; Deng and Chen's support from, 19-20; Deng cutting size of military, 235; Russian weapons systems acquired by China, 237; Xi seizing control of, 171; Xi's spending on, 190, 196, 237t. See also People's Liberation Army

军事和安全部队：防暴部队，92-93；控制权，6、8、13、43；国防预算，237万亿美元；邓小平和陈光诚的支持，19-20；邓小平削减军力，235；中国购买俄罗斯武器系统，237；习近平掌控控制权，171；习近平在国防上的支出，190、196、237万亿美元。另见中国人民解放军

Ministry of Agriculture, 66

农业部，66

Ministry of Education's "Ten Professional Principles," 182

教育部《十大专业原则》182

Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations and Trade (MOFERT), 59

对外经济关系和贸易部（MOFERT），59

Ministry of Public Security (MPS), 93

公安部（MPS），93

Mischief Reef seizure by China (1995), 238

中国对美济礁的占领（1995年），238

modernization of China, 3, 8, 53-54, 137, 139, 151, 225, 229, 255-56

中国现代化，3，8，53-54，137，139，151，225，229，255-56

most-favored-nation (MFN) trade status, 147, 227, 233

最惠国待遇（MFN）贸易地位，147、227、233



Nakasone,Yasuhiro,228

中曾根康宏，228

National Bureau of Statistics, 107, 153, 198

国家统计局，107、153、198

National Meeting on Publicity and Theoretical Work (2013), 178

全国宣传与理论工作会议（2013），178

National People's Congress (NPC): constitutional revision (1982), 24; Deng's restoration of function of, 27, 28-29; party violating laws passed by, 99 national security, 190-91, 197; as prime goal of Xi's policies, 211; self-reliance policy and, 210

全国人民代表大会（全国人大）：宪法修正（1982年），第24页；邓小平恢复全国人大职能，第27、28-29页；党违反全国人大通过的法律，第99页；国家安全，第190-191、197页；作为习近平政策的首要目标，第211页；自力更生政策，第210页

National Security Commission, 179, 196

国家安全委员会，179，196

National Supervisory Commission, 173

国家监察委员会，173

nationalism, 6, 7, 75, 91-92, 98, 129, 168

民族主义，6、7、75、91-92、98、129、168

NATO bombing of Chinese Embassy in Belgrade (1999), 91, 240, 242

北约轰炸中国驻贝尔格莱德大使馆（1999年），91，240，242

neo-authoritarian developmentalism (1992-2012), 12, 14, 74-100; conservative intelligentsia's debate of, 81; corruption fueled by, 75, 99-100, 122; defined, 80, 256; Deng's southern tour (1992) as beginning of, 76-77, 83, 232; emergence under Deng's leadership, 19, 33, 78-81, 226; end marked by economic downturn, 163; hard-liner opposition fading after Soviet collapse enabling, 79, 81-83, 256; incompatible with democratization and rule of law, 99; inherent flaws of, 12,

新威权发展主义（1992-2012），12、14、74-100；保守派知识分子的辩论，81；腐败的根源，75、99-100、122；定义，80、256；邓小平的南巡（1992）是其开端，76-77、83、232；在邓小平领导下的兴起，19、33、78-81、226；以经济衰退为标志的终结，163；苏联解体后强硬派反对势力的消退使得，79、81-83、256；与民主化和法治不相容，99；其固有缺陷，12，

neo-authoritarian developmentalism (1992-2012) (continued)

新威权主义发展主义（1992-2012）（续）

98-100, 101, 103, 128-31, 133, 189, 193, 223, 255-57; institutionalization of party and balance of power, 84-88, 98-99, 168-69; leadership choices of Deng for, 80; liberalism's fade after Tiananmen crackdown enabling, 81; meaning of "neo-authoritarianism," 265n33; pillars of, 10-11, 75, 83-97; in place until Xi's rise, 82, 83; political strength from military and party bureaucracy, 19-20; in post-Tiananmen era, 12, 74; return of totalitarianism from, 8, 10-13, 101, 129, 165, 186-89, 255; Soviet Union's fall giving impetus to, 74, 75, 80, 81-82, 223, 254; trapped transition of, 192, 255. See also post-Tiananmen order

98-100、101、103、128-31、133、189、193、223、255-57；党的制度化和权力平衡，84-88、98-99、168-69；邓小平的领导选择，80；天安门事件后自由主义的衰落，81；“新威权主义”的含义，265n33；支柱，10-11、75、83-97；在习近平崛起之前一直存在，82、83；来自军队和党的官僚机构的政治力量，19-20；后天安门时代，12、74；极权主义的回归，见第8、10-13、101、129、165、186-189、255页；苏联解体推动了……，见第74、75、80、81-82、223、254页；转型困境，见第192、255页。另见天安门事件后的秩序。

neo-Stalinism under Xi, 12, 165, 168, 186, 265n33; altering US-China relations, 251; elevation of party's political supremacy and, 192; at end of second term, 189; surveillance as pillar of, 182

习近平领导下的新斯大林主义，第12、165、168、186、265页脚注33；改变中美关系，第251页；提升党的政治至高地位，第192页；第二任期结束时，第189页；监控作为支柱，第182页

networked authoritarianism, 113

网络化威权主义，113

New Citizens Movement, 119, 180

新公民运动，119，180

new cold war (NCW), 4, 224, 246-52; Biden's containment policy, 207, 252; China's alignment with Russia and Iran, 224; Deng warning of, 231; escalation likely, 14; inevitability of, 257-58; strategic initiatives to remake world order, 248-51; Trump's first term triggering, 251, 258; US-China trade war creating, 189; Xi blaming economic problems on, 191; Xi elevating strategic partnership with Russia, 252

新冷战（NCW），第4、224、246-252页；拜登的遏制政策，第207、252页；中国与俄罗斯和伊朗的结盟，第224页；邓小平的警告，第231页；局势升级的可能性，第14页；不可避免性，第257-258页；重塑世界秩序的战略举措，第248-251页；特朗普第一任期引发，第251、258页；美中贸易战的产生，第189页；习近平将经济问题归咎于……，第191页；习近平提升与俄罗斯的战略伙伴关系，第252页。

New Development Bank (Shanghai), 250

新开发银行（上海），250

New Era, Xi's rule as, 175

新时代，习近平的统治，175

Nixon, Richard, 225, 226

尼克松，理查德，225，226

North Korean nuclear development, China seeking diplomatic solution to, 244

朝鲜核发展，中国寻求外交解决，244



Obama, Barack: "Pivot to Asia" policy, 246, 251; trade tensions with China and, 152

奥巴马，巴拉克：“重返亚洲”政策，第246、251页；与中国的贸易紧张局势，第152页

Occupy Central (civil disobedience movement), 185

占领中环（公民不服从运动），185

Official Development Assistance program (Japan), 228

官方发展援助计划（日本），228

Ohira, Masayoshi, 227-28

大平正义，227-28

Olympics (Beijing 2008), 102, 244

奥运会（北京2008），102，244

one-child policy, 100, 110, 154, 259

独生子女政策，100、110、154、259

one China policy, 226-27, 239, 240

一个中国政策，第226-27页，第239页，第240页

orthodox ideology. See communism

正统意识形态。参见共产主义

"Outline on the Implementation of Patriotic Education" (Central Propaganda Department 1994), 89-91

《爱国主义教育实施纲要》（中央宣传部，1994年），第89-91页



partial reform equilibrium/trap, 11, 100, 129-30, 133, 192, 256

部分改革均衡/陷阱，11，100，129-30，133，192，256

paternalism of CCP under Mao, 21

毛泽东时代中共的家长式作风，21

path dependence: China's relations with outside world and, 222; economic development and, 13, 45, 132-33; probability of certain developments and, 12; widest range of options in 1980s, 12, 222

路径依赖：中国与外部世界的关系，222；经济发展，13、45、132-33；某些发展的概率，12；20世纪80年代最广泛的选择范围，12、222

patriotic education campaign, 89-91

爱国主义教育运动，89-91年

People's Armed Police (PAP), 93

人民武警（PAP），93

People's Bank of China (PBOC), 137-38

中国人民银行（PBOC），137-38

People's Daily editorial on Tiananmen protests, 41

《人民日报》关于天安门抗议活动的社论，第41页

People's Liberation Army (PLA): Deng's reduction in size of, 235; Deng's support from, 20; military exercises in Taiwan Strait, 239; modernization of, 235-37; in Tiananmen Square, 43; Xi's purges of high-ranking members, 171

中国人民解放军（PLA）：邓小平缩军队规模，235；邓小平获得的支持，20；台湾海峡军事演习，239；军队现代化，235-37；天安门事件，43；习近平清洗高级成员，171

percapitaincomegrowth,3,50,71,79,152-55 perestroika,7,82

人均收入增长，3,50,71,79,152-55 改革，7,82

personal freedoms, expansion of, 94

个人自由，扩展，94

personalistic rule, 1, 10, 23, 129, 187, 219, 255, 259

个人主义规则，1，10，23，129，187，219，255，259

Politburo: annual written self-evaluations required by Xi, 175; dual circulation strategy endorsed by (2020), 209; Hu Chunhua not on list to be appointed to, 1; power to expel Central Committee members, 169; Xi's dominance of, 176; Zhao's reform proposals and, 31. See also specific documents by name

政治局：习近平要求每年进行书面自我评估，第175页；双循环战略获得（2020年）认可，第209页；胡春华不在任命名单上，第1页；中央委员的罢免权，第169页；习近平的主导地位，第176页；赵立坚的改革建议，第31页。另见按姓名列出的具体文件。

Politburo Standing Committee (PSC), 102, 175; appointed by Deng, 77-78

政治局常务委员会，102，175；邓小平任命，77-78年

political reforms:Deng's promotion of, 27-29,36;Zhao's attempt at comprehensive reform,29-32

政治改革：邓小平的推动，27-29，36；赵立坚的全面改革尝试，29-32

population growth: demographic dividend and, 152-55, 158, 163, 193; one-child policy and, 100, 110, 154; total dependency ratio and, 153-54

人口增长：人口红利，152-55、158、163、193；独生子女政策，100、110、154；总抚养比，153-54

post-Mao China: maintenance of foundational institutions of totalitarianism, 12, 13, 23, 43, 73, 94, 165, 187, 254; path dependence and probability of certain developments, 12; power struggle after Mao's death, 16-17; three eras constituting, 12

后毛泽东时代的中国：极权主义基础制度的维护，第12、13、23、43、73、94、165、187、254页；路径依赖与某些发展的概率，第12页；毛泽东去世后的权力斗争，第16-17页；构成中国的三个时代，第12页

post-Tiananmen order (1992-2012), 74-100; absence of third-party enforcement in, 88; balance of power, 87-88, 98-99, 168-69; beginning of the end of, 123-28, 164, 256; crackdowns on overt challenges to party authority, 93-94, 178; dissidents forced into exile, 94; globalization and, 241; Li Keqiang and, 129; likelihood of enduring, 101, 163; nationalism, 91-92; patriotic education campaign, 89-91; pillars of, 83-97, 232; private sector and, 212; relations with West and, 222; rule-based politics of, 84-86; selective repression, 92-95; US as strategic partner, 223; Xi breaking from, 129, 224; Zhu as most influential economic policymaker in, 87. See also Hu Jintao; Jiang Zemin; neo-authoritarian developmentalism

天安门事件后的秩序（1992-2012），74-100；缺乏第三方强制执行，88；权力平衡，87-88、98-99、168-169；终结的开始，123-128、164、256；镇压公开挑战党权威的行为，93-94、178；异见人士被迫流亡，94；全球化与，241；李克强与，129；持久性的可能性，101、163；民族主义，91-92；爱国主义教育运动，89-91；支柱，83-97、232；私营部门与，212；与西方的关系与，222；基于规则的政治，84-86；选择性镇压，92-95；美国作为战略伙伴，第223页；习近平打破常规，第129、224页；朱棣文是2011年最具影响力的经济政策制定者，第87页。另见胡锦涛；江泽民；新威权发展主义

pragmatic Leninism, 129, 253, 257 "The PRC Interim Regulations on Private Businesses" (State Council), 64 press freedom, Xi's repression of, 173, 177-78

实用主义列宁主义，129、253、257；《中华人民共和国私营企业暂行条例》（国务院），64；新闻自由，习近平的镇压，173、177-178

private sector and privatization, 60-66; of agricultural sector, 135; ascendance of, 132, 142-45; collective enterprises ("wearing red hats") to disguise, 66; compared to return on capital from SOEs, 159; constitutional provisions and, 63-64; contribution to industrial output, 61, 61t, 64, 65t, 144; Covid-19 pandemic and business closure, 218; debt level and deleveraging campaign, 199-200, 215-16, 220, 259; Deng's development of, 16, 25, 37; efficiency of, 45, 143, 215; emigration in 2022-2023, 219; foreign trade and, 149; as largest contributor to economic output, 44, 135, 143-44, 163; legal recognition of nonstate entities, 145; party membership of entrepreneurs, 96-97; peasants' liberation as first step in creating, 50-51; pioneers of, from outside of state sector, 66; political power maintained separately from, 13; post-Tiananmen era reforms and, 196-97; rapid growth of, 14, 46, 60; of real estate sector, 141; SEZs and, 57-58; shadow banking system for loans to, 215; state's direct control over, 192; stimulus package as response to global financial crisis (2008) discriminating against, 212-13; TVEs as part of, 52, 76; Xi's policies and, 212-17, 259

私营部门和私有化，60-66；农业部门，135；崛起，132，142-45；集体企业（“戴红帽子”）的伪装，66；与国有企业的资本回报率相比，159；宪法规定和，63-64；对工业产值的贡献，61，61吨，64，65吨，144；新冠疫情和企业停业，218；债务水平和去杠杆化运动，199-200，215-16，220，259；邓小平的发展，16，25，37；效率，45，143，215；2022-2023年的移民，219；对外贸易和，149；作为经济产出的最大贡献者，44、135、143-44、163；非国家实体的法律认可，145；企业家的党员身份，96-97；农民解放是创造的第一步，50-51；来自国家部门以外的先驱者，66；政治权力与……分开维持，13；后天安门时代的改革，196-97；……的快速增长，14、46、60；房地产行业的快速增长，141；经济特区，57-58；影子银行体系向……提供贷款，215；国家对……的直接控制，192；作为应对全球金融危机（2008年）的刺激计划歧视……，212-13；作为……的一部分的乡镇企业，52、76；习近平的政策，212-17、259

"Procedures for Detaining and the Repatriation of Vagrants and Beggars in Cities" (State Council 1982), 106-7, 114

《城市流浪乞丐拘留和遣返程序》（国务院，1982年），第106-107页，第114页

prodemocracy movement: hard-liners targeting, 39-42, 76; liberals advocating for, 29-33; repressive tactics used against, 93-94; separation of powers, Deng's rejection of proposal of, 30-32, 88. See also Hu Yaobang; liberalism (1980s); Tiananmen Square protests (1989); Zhao Ziyang

民主运动：强硬派的攻击，39-42页，76页；自由派的倡导，29-33页；针对民主运动的镇压策略，93-94页；权力分立，邓小平拒绝该提议，30-32页，88页。另见胡耀邦；自由主义（20世纪80年代）；天安门广场抗议（1989年）；赵紫阳

"Proposal of the CCP Central Committee on Formulating the Fourteenth Five-Year Plan for National Economic and Social Development and the Long-Term Goals for 2035" (Fifth Plenum 2020), 209-11

《中共中央关于制定国民经济和社会发展第十四个五年规划和2035年远景目标的建议》（2020年五中全会），第209-211页

public interest litigation, 115-16

公益诉讼，115-16

purchasing power parity, 3, 79, 133, 249

购买力平价分别为 3、79、133、249

purges:Deng's purge of liberal reformers, 5-6,9,12,15,16,20,33,36-38,41-42,75, 79; feature of totalitarianism, 188; Hu's use of,84; Jiang's use of,84; Mao's purge of Deng,2,17; Mao's use of,83,86; rare during post-Tiananmen era,84,98; Stalinist,265n33;Xi'suseof,1,2,11,13, 86-88,112,120,122,128,165,167,169-73, 179-80,187,255,259

清洗：邓小平清洗自由派改革者，5-6,9,12,15,16,20,33,36-38,41-42,75,79；极权主义的特征，188；胡锦涛的使用，84；江泽民的使用，84；毛泽东清洗邓小平，2,17；毛泽东的使用，83,86；天安门事件后时期罕见，84,98；斯大林主义，265n33；习近平的使用，1,2,11,13,86-88,112,120,122,128,165,167,169-73,179-80,187,255,259

Putin,Vladimir,208,249

普京，弗拉基米尔，208，249



Qiao Shi, 87

Qiao Shi, 87



Reagan, Ronald, 227

里根，罗纳德，227

real estate sector: corruption and, 121-22; crash during Xi's tenure, 162, 170, 195, 203-4, 219, 259; as domestic driver of growth, 102, 158, 194, 200-201, 201t, 220; housing bubble, 157-59, 162, 163, 190, 192, 194-95, 200-204, 201t, 254; privatization of, 141; state-owned housing, 141; "three red lines" regulation, 202-3

房地产行业：腐败与……，121-22页；习近平执政期间的崩盘，162、170、195、203-4、219、259页；作为国内增长动力，102、158、194、200-201、201t、220页；房地产泡沫，157-59、162、163、190、192、194-95、200-204、201t、254页；私有化，141页；国有住房，141页；“三红线”监管，202-3页。

reform and opening (1978-1989), 53-60; China dream and, 8; conservative backlash against openness, 15, 16, 25-27, 39, 76; Deng's mistakes in pursuit of, 42; economic reform and, 15, 230; as great leap forward from Mao's totalitarianism, 225; Jiang as Deng's successor and, 75; modernization of China due to, 256; ongoing commitment to, 147; party backing Deng to open the door, 45; perpetuation of CCP's rule and, 5, 21, 188; purge of liberals and, 75; slow progress of, 36-37; Soviet collapse galvanizing, 3, 12, 74, 75, 80, 81-83, 223, 254, 256; totalitarianism's foundational institutions untouched by, 23, 43, 165, 187; US and Japan's role in, 223, 226, 230; US trade and investment as priority in, 208; West, engagement with, 225; widest range of options in, 12; Zhao Ziyang and, 3. See also taoguan yanghui; West, economic engagement with

改革开放（1978-1989），53-60；中国梦，8；保守派对开放的反弹，15、16、25-27、39、76；邓小平追求改革开放的错误，42；经济改革，15、230；作为摆脱毛泽东极权主义的一大飞跃，225；江泽民作为邓小平的接班人，75；中国现代化是由于改革开放，256；持续致力于改革开放，147；党支持邓小平开放，45；中共统治的延续，5、21、188；清洗自由派，75；改革开放进展缓慢，36-37；苏联解体带来的激励，3、12、74、75、80、81-83、223、254、256；极权主义的基础制度未受影响，23、43、165、187；美国和日本在其中的作用，223、226、230；美国贸易和投资是优先事项，208；西方与……的接触，225；最广泛的选择范围，12；赵紫阳和，3。另见桃冠阳晖；西方与……的经济接触

regime legitimacy and performance legitimacy, 3, 11, 18; co-optation of students and social elites, 95-97; likelihood of disappearing under Xi's economic difficulties, 190; linked to economic development, 6, 38, 44, 47, 75, 82, 98, 188, 190; partial reform equilibrium and, 100, 129-30, 133; personal freedoms, expansion translating into, 94; private sector and, 212

政权合法性和政绩合法性，第3、11、18页；拉拢学生和社会精英，第95-97页；在习近平的经济困境下消失的可能性，第190页；与经济发展相关，第6、38、44、47、75、82、98、188、190页；部分改革的平衡与，第100、129-130、133页；个人自由的扩张转化为，第94页；私营部门与，第212页

Regulations on Chinese Communist Party Discipline and Sanctions (1997), 85

中国共产党纪律和制裁条例（1997年），第85页

Regulations on Strengthening and Maintaining the Party Center's Centralized and Unified Leadership (2017), 174-75

关于加强和维护党中央集中统一领导的规定（2017年），174-175页

religious groups, 9, 93, 112, 130; Falungong spiritual group, 94-95, 98, 112

宗教团体，9、93、112、130；法轮功灵修团体，94-95、98、112

repression: of academics, 181; of foreign NGOs, 182; of human rights lawyers, 180-81; of labor rights organizers and protestors, 141, 181; selective and soft-authoritarian repression of Jiang and Hu, 92-95, 98, 113, 115, 187; Xi's use of, 165, 177-83, 187, 191. See also domestic security

镇压：对学术界的镇压，第181页；对外国非政府组织的镇压，第182页；对人权律师的镇压，第180-181页；对劳工权利组织者和抗议者的镇压，第141页、第181页；对江泽民和胡锦涛的选择性和温和威权镇压，第92-95页、第98页、第113页、第115页、第187页；习近平对……的运用，第165页、第177-183页、第187页、第191页。另见国内安全。

Republic of China. See Taiwan Resolution on Several Questions on the Construction of a Socialist Market

中华民国。参见台湾关于建设社会主义市场若干问题的决议

Economic System" (CCP reform package 1993), 135

《经济体制》（1993年中共改革方案），第135页

retirement rules. See mandatory retirements rights defense movement, 114-19; public interest litigation, 115-16; repression of human rights lawyers, 180

退休规则。参见强制退休权利捍卫运动，第114-119页；公益诉讼，第115-116页；人权律师的镇压，第180页。

RiverElegy,33

河流挽歌，33

rule of law: Deng's lack of interest in, 22, 28; effect of not having, 165; Hong Kong and, 186; liberals of 1980s seeking to institute, 21; neo-authoritarianism without, 99, 102; property rights based on, 11; third-party enforceability and, 10

法治：邓小平对法治缺乏兴趣，第22、28页；缺乏法治的后果，第165页；香港及，第186页；20世纪80年代的自由主义者试图建立法治，第21页；没有法治的新威权主义，第99、102页；基于法治的财产权，第11页；第三方可执行性及，第10页

rural population of China, 8, 49; entrepreneurs from, 66; neglect of, 105; as party members, 95-96; rise out of poverty, 135; urbanization of surplus labor, 134, 153-54, 194; village committees, election of, 99

中国农村人口，8,49；企业家，66；被忽视，105；作为党员，95-96；脱贫，135；剩余劳动力城镇化，134,153-154,194；村委会选举，99

Russia: post-Cold War relations with China, 237; sanctions on, 207; world order post-9/11, 249; Xi's alignment with and "no-limit friendship declaration," 208, 224, 249, 252. See also Ukraine, Russian invasion of

俄罗斯：冷战后与中国的关系，第237页；制裁，第207页；9/11事件后的世界秩序，第249页；习近平与中国的结盟及“无限友谊宣言”，第208、224、249、252页。另见乌克兰，俄罗斯入侵。



Sanlu poisonous baby formula case (2008), 115

三鹿有毒婴儿奶粉案（2008）115

SARS crisis, 105-6

SARS危机，105-6

scar literature, 32-33

疤痕文献，32-33

security. See domestic security; military and security forces

安全。参见国内安全；军事和安全部队

selective repression, 92-95

选择性抑制，92-95

Senkaku/Diaoyu Islands dispute,228,238 245-46,250

Senkaku/Diaoyu Islands dispute,228,238 245-46,250

separation of powers, Deng's rejection of proposal of, 30-32, 88

权力分立，邓小平拒绝该提议，30-32，88

"Several Policy Provisions on Nonagricultural Individually Operated Economic Activities in Urban Areas" (State Council), 63

《关于城镇非农个体经济活动若干政策规定》（国务院），第63页

"Several Provisions on Expanding Management Autonomy of State-owned Industrial Enterprises" (State Council), 67

《关于扩大国有工业企业管理自主权的若干规定》（国务院），67

Shaanbei oilfield litigation (2003), 118

陕北油田诉讼案（2003），118

Shanghai area: Covid-19 pandemic and, 218; housing bubble and, 201; as SEZ, 146; specialized industrial areas near, 147

上海地区：新冠疫情及，218；房地产泡沫及，201；作为经济特区，146；附近专业工业区，147

Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO), 238

上海合作组织（SCO），238

Shanghai Gang's rivalry with Youth League faction, 123-26, 128

上海帮与青年同盟派系的敌对关系，123-26，128

Shanghai Stock Exchange, 214

上海证券交易所，214

Shanghai-Volkswagen joint venture, 26-27

上海大众合资公司，26-27

Sharp Eyes project, 183

锐眼计划，183

Shenzhen: housing bubble and, 201; SEZ, 56, 57

深圳：房地产泡沫，201；经济特区，56，57

Sik,Ota,48

Sik,Ota,48

Silk Road Fund, 250

丝路基金，250

Singapore: demographic dividend and, 152; as economic success of globalization, 9; as neo-authoritarian model, 80, 81, 140, 265n33; People's Action Party (PAP), 6

新加坡：人口红利，152；作为全球化的经济成功，9；作为新威权主义模式，80、81、140、265n33；人民行动党（PAP），6

Sino-Japanese Friendship Committee for the 21st Century, 228

中日21世纪友好委员会，228

Skynet project, 112, 182, 183

天网计划，112，182，183

slave labor, 116

奴隶劳动，116

social control, 1, 42, 79, 82, 92, 187, 196, 265n33

社会控制，1，42，79，82，92，187，196，265n33

social inequality. See inequality issues

社会不平等。参见不平等问题。

social media, crackdown on, 2, 113, 179, 187; registration of users with real names, 180

社交媒体，打击，2，113，179，187；用户实名注册，180

social unrest: causes of, 110-11, 141; in Hu era, 110-13, 128; in Jiang era, 114; late 1990s, 100; neo-authoritarian developmentalism giving rise to, 101, 254; party tactics to quell, 111; rightful resistance based on rules of governance, 111. See also domestic security

社会动荡：起因，110-111，141；胡时代，110-113，128；江泽民时代，114；20世纪90年代末，100；新威权发展主义引发的社会动荡，101，254；党的镇压策略，111；基于治理规则的正当抵抗，111。另见国内安全

socialism: alienation of, 33; with Chinese characteristics, 91, 167, 177, 178, 213; limited socialist welfare state causing higher savings rates, 156-57; need to uphold path of, 5, 231

社会主义：异化，33；具有中国特色，91、167、177、178、213；有限的社会主义福利国家导致更高的储蓄率，156-157；需要坚持既定路线，5、231

soft-authoritarian repression, 92-95, 98, 113, 115, 187

软性威权镇压，92-95、98、113、115、187

Song Ping, 80

宋平，80岁

South China Sea: China's construction of artificial islands in, 250; disputed claims in, 245, 246

南海：中国在南海建造人工岛礁，第250页；南海主权声索，第245、246页

South Korea: China's relations with, 238; demographic dividend and, 152; East Asian financial crisis and, 141; as economic success of globalization, 9; export-processing zones (EPZs) and, 56; as neo-authoritarian regime, 80, 81, 265n33; North Korea nuclear development and, 244

韩国：与中国的关系，238；人口红利，152；东亚金融危机，141；作为全球化的经济成功，9；出口加工区，56；作为新威权政体，80、81、265n33；朝鲜核发展，244

Southeast Asia: China's security policies and, 237, 238; manufacturing relocating to, 207

东南亚：中国的安全政策及，第237、238页；制造业转移至，第207页

Soviet Union: Afghanistan invasion by (1979), 225; Deng's rapprochement with, 230; thaw of Khrushchev era, 32. See also Cold War; former Soviet bloc; Russia

苏联：入侵阿富汗（1979年），第225页；邓小平与苏联的和解，第230页；赫鲁晓夫时代的解冻，第32页。另见冷战；前苏联集团；俄罗斯

Soviet Union, collapse of: bankruptcy of orthodox communism revealed by, 79; Chinese patriotic education campaign instituted in reaction to, 90; Deng's analysis of, 7, 77, 78, 80, 131, 232; failure to reform economy as factor, 82; neo-authoritarian developmentalism galvanized by, 3, 12, 74, 75, 80, 81-83, 223, 254, 256; Xi learning from, 166, 167

苏联解体：正统共产主义的破产，第79页；中国为应对苏联解体而发起的爱国主义教育运动，第90页；邓小平的分析，第7、77、78、80、131、232页；经济改革失败是其中一个因素，第82页；新威权发展主义的兴起，第3、12、74、75、80、81-83、223、254、256页；习近平从中汲取经验，第166、167页

special economic zones (SEZs), 26, 27, 37, 47, 56-58, 145-46

特殊经济区（SEZ），26、27、37、47、56-58、145-46

stagnation in Hu Jintao era, 14, 101-31, 192, 254; macroeconomic imbalance and, 193; weaknesses of neo-authoritarianism and, 86, 98, 101, 128, 133. See also Hu Jintao

胡锦涛时代的停滞，14、101-131、192、254；宏观经济失衡，193；新威权主义的弱点，86、98、101、128、133。另见胡锦涛

Stalinism, 2, 12, 167, 168. See also neostalinism under Xi

斯大林主义，第2、12、167、168页。另见习近平领导下的新斯大林主义。

standards of living, 3, 71-72, 75, 116, 190; party's legitimacy gaining from increase, 44, 47

生活水平，第3、71-72、75、116、190页；政党合法性因增长而增强，第44、47页

State Administration for Industry and Commerce (SAIC) survey on collective firms, 66

国家工商行政管理总局（SAIC）对集体经营企业的调查，66

State Asset Supervision and Administration Commission (SASAC), 140, 214

国家资产监督管理委员会（国资委），140，214

State Council: conservatives' takeover (1987-1988), 16; dual-track pricing allowed for SOEs, 70-71; erosion of conservatives' control of economic policy of (early 1990s), 76; financial system overhaul (1993), 137; loss of power to "leading small groups," 174; private sector, regulation of, 63-64; SOEs, expansion of autonomy of, 67; wholly-owned foreign firms, regulation of, 55; Zhao's reform proposals and, 32

国务院：保守派掌权（1987-1988），16；允许国有企业实行双轨定价，70-71；保守派对经济政策控制的削弱（20世纪90年代初），76；金融体制改革（1993），137；权力向“领导小集团”转移，174；私营部门监管，63-64；国有企业自主权扩大，67；外商独资企业监管，55；赵立坚的改革建议，32

state-owned enterprises (SOEs): Communist regime's effective use of, 6; contract responsibility system, 32, 68-69; corruption and, 121; critical flaws of, 67; debt load, increase in, 194, 199-200; decline in share of industrial output, 61, 61t, 64, 65t; Deng's experimentation with, 37, 39; discriminatory policies favoring, 13, 62, 76, 102, 138, 139, 190, 212; domestic stock market dominated by, 202

国有企业：共产党政权对国有企业的有效利用，第6页；合同责任制，第32、68-69页；腐败问题，第121页；国有企业的关键缺陷，第67页；债务负担增加，第194、199-200页；工业产值占比下降，第61、61吨、64、65吨；邓小平的试验，第37、39页；歧视性政策偏袒国有企业，第13、62、76、102、138、139、190、212页；国内股市被国有企业主导，第202页

state-owned enterprises (SOEs) (continued) dual-track pricing allowed for, 70-71; employment in private sector vs., 143-44, 144t; excess industrial capacity and, 197-98; expanded autonomy of, 67-68; in former Soviet bloc, 60, 62, 67; giant SOEs, creation by mergers, 214; global financial crisis, effect of, 162; "grasp the big and let go of the small" strategy, 69, 140-41; Hu's failure to reform, 109, 220; industrial, 121, 144; inefficiency of, 46, 61-62, 67, 102, 140, 162, 163, 214; investment issues and lower returns of, 159; labor disputes with, 110; mass bankruptcy of (late 1990s), 69, 98, 110, 139, 141, 142-43; modern enterprise system and, 139; privatization of, 133, 140-41; reform attempts (1980s), 46, 49, 54, 61-62, 66-70, 72, 84; reform attempts (1990s), 84, 139, 141-42; SASAC's role to oversee, 140, 214; self-sufficiency in high-tech manufacturing tasked to, 214; sixty-point reform plan presented by Xi (2013) and, 195-96, 213; soft budget constraints, 67, 69; stimulus package as response to global financial crisis (2008) favoring, 212-13; underpriced asset sales by, 142-43

国有企业（续）允许双轨定价，70-71；私营部门就业与国有企业就业对比，143-44，144吨；工业产能过剩和，197-98；扩大自主权，67-68；在前苏联集团，60，62，67；巨型国有企业，通过合并而产生，214；全球金融危机的影响，162；“抓住大，放手小”战略，69，140-41；胡锦涛改革失败，109，220；工业，121，144；效率低下，46，61-62，67，102，140，162，163，214；投资问题和较低的回报，159；劳资纠纷，110；大规模破产（20世纪90年代末），69、98、110、139、141、142-43；现代企业制度和，139；私有化，133、140-41；改革尝试（20世纪80年代），46、49、54、61-62、66-70、72、84；改革尝试（20世纪90年代），84、139、141-42；国资委的监督作用，140、214；高科技制造业自给自足的任务，214；习近平提出的六十点改革方案（2013年）和，195-96、213；软性预算约束，67、69；刺激方案作为应对全球金融危机（2008 年）的措施，第 212-13 页；低估资产出售，第 142-43 页

stock market intervention, 214-15

股票市场干预，214-15

strongman rule, 8, 10-13, 42, 99. See also Mao Zedong and Maoist era; totalitarianism; Xi Jinping

强人统治，第8、10-13、42、99页。另见毛泽东和毛泽东时代；极权主义；习近平

The Sun and the Man (movie), 35

《太阳与人》（电影），35

Sun Zhengcai, 170, 176

Sun Zhengcai, 170, 176

Sun Zhigang, 106, 114

Sun Zhigang, 106, 114

Supreme People's Court, 175, 179

最高人民法院，175，179

Supreme People's Procuratorate (SPP), 120, 175, 179

最高人民检察院（SPP），120、175、179

surveillance: advanced technology for, 93, 112-13, 129, 182, 196; Hu era investment in, 130; of internet, 93, 113; mass, 13, 93, 112-13, 182-83; routine surveillance of dissidents, 180; of Uighurs, 184; of universities, 93, 181-82

监控：先进技术用于，93、112-113、129、182、196；胡时代投资于，130；互联网，93、113；大众，13、93、112-113、182-183；对异见人士的例行监控，180；对维吾尔族人的例行监控，184；对大学的例行监控，93、181-182



Taishi village incident (2005), 117-18

太石村事件（2005），117-18

Taiwan: Chinese entrepreneurs in, 146; Chinese military budget and, 236; democratization of, 239; Deng on return of, 226; as economic success of globalization, 9; export-processing zones (EPZs) and, 56; FDI flowing from, 147, 239; as neo-authoritarian regime, 80, 81, 265n33; 92 Consensus, 239; Third Taiwan Strait Crisis (1995-1996), 239, 242; trade with China, 239; US-China conflict over, 207, 226-27, 238-41; US support for, 91, 226, 238-40, 242-43. See also one China policy

台湾：中国企业家在台，146；中国军费预算，236；民主化，239；邓小平论回归，226；作为全球化的经济成功，9；出口加工区，56；来自台湾的外国直接投资，147，239；作为新威权政体，80，81，265n33；九二共识，239；第三次台海危机（1995-1996），239，242；与中国的贸易，239；美中冲突，207，226-227，238-241；美国对台湾的支持，91，226，238-240，242-243。另见“一个中国”政策。

taoguan yanghui (Deng's dictum of hiding your brightness and building up strength), 82, 128, 165, 224, 225, 232, 235, 242; Belt and Road Initiative as decisive break with, 249; Hu vs. Xi and, 246-47; Hu's shift away from, 243-44, 245; Jiang subscribing to, 244

邓小平的“藏光积强”，82、128、165、224、225、232、235、242；“一带一路”倡议是与……决裂的决定性一步，249；胡锦涛与习近平的对比，246-247；胡锦涛的立场转变，243-244、245；江泽民的拥护，244

taxation: agricultural tax abolished by Hu, 106; FDI, favorable tax treatment for, 57, 146; foreign trade incentives, 59, 60; local government tax system, 136; value-added tax, 136, 149

税收：胡锦涛废除农业税，第106页；外商直接投资税收优惠，第57、146页；对外贸易激励措施，第59、60页；地方政府税收制度，第136页；增值税，第136、149页。

technology and high tech, 13; artificial intelligence (AI) and emerging areas, 211; forced import substitution, 212; Foreign-Capital Enterprises Law (1986) and creation of technology industry, 55; military technology exported from US to China, 227; sanctions banning China from purchasing US high-end semiconductors, 209, 234, 259; self-sufficiency as goal, 190, 209-10, 214; semiconductor industry, China's funding of development, 211; Shanghai's Pudong area as manufacturing hub for, 146; Shenzhen's growth as high-tech center, 57; for surveillance, 93, 112-13, 129, 182

技术与高科技，第13页；人工智能（AI）及新兴领域，第211页；强制进口替代，第212页；《外商投资企业法》（1986年）与科技产业的创建，第55页；美国向中国出口的军事技术，第227页；禁止中国购买美国高端半导体的制裁，第209、234、259页；自给自足为目标，第190、209-10、214页；半导体产业，中国的发展资金，第211页；上海浦东作为制造业中心，第146页；深圳作为高科技中心的崛起，第57页；用于监控，第93、112-113、129、182页。

Temasek (Singapore agency), 140

淡马锡（新加坡代理机构），140

"Ten Professional Principles" (Ministry of Education) to institutionalize ideological repression in universities, 182

教育部发布的《十项专业原则》旨在将意识形态压制制度化于大学之中，182

term limits: abrogated by Xi, 2, 177, 256; accelerating elite circulation, 85-86; in Chinese constitution amendment (1982), 24; Deng instituting, 2, 10, 22, 23, 42, 188-89, 256; exemption of most senior leaders, 24, 42; vagueness and unenforceability of rules, 256

任期限制：习近平废除，第2、177、256页；精英阶层更迭加速，第85-86页；1982年中国宪法修正案，第24页；邓小平制定，第2、10、22、23、42、188-89、256页；大多数高级领导人豁免，第24、42页；规则模糊不清且无法执行，第256页

terror and mass terror, 6; former Soviet states abandoning practice of, 7; foundational institutions of totalitarianism enabling ready use of, 94; slight decline in 1980s, 44

恐怖主义和大规模恐怖主义，6；前苏联国家放弃这种做法，7；极权主义的基础制度使其能够轻易使用，94；20世纪80年代略有下降，44

Thailand: China's assistance to, in financial crisis (1997), 238; demographic dividend and, 152; East Asian financial crisis and, 141; as neo-authoritarian regime, 81

泰国：中国在金融危机中的援助（1997年），第238页；人口红利，第152页；东亚金融危机，第141页；作为新威权政权，第81页

third-party enforcement, effect of absence of, 10, 24-25, 42, 88

第三方强制执行，缺失的后果，10，24-25，42，88

Tiananmen Square protests (1989): avoidability of massacre, 41; crackdown's repercussions, 6, 12, 13, 15, 43, 48, 74, 75, 79, 97, 223, 230, 233; crisis precipitated by, 40-41; Deng crushing, 3, 16, 20, 41, 44, 230, 256; leaders forced into exile, 94; liberal approach disregarded in handling, 21; miniature Statue of Liberty erected by students, 92; People's Daily editorial on, 41; rising out of 1980s wave of liberalism, 34, 36-40; sanctions imposed on China for crackdown, 135

天安门广场抗议（1989年）：屠杀的可避免性，第41页；镇压的后果，第6、12、13、15、43、48、74、75、79、97、223、230、233页；危机的起因，第40-41页；邓小平的镇压，第3、16、20、41、44、230、256页；领导人被迫流亡，第94页；自由主义方针在处理中被忽视，第21页；学生竖立微型自由女神像，第92页；《人民日报》社论，第41页；源于20世纪80年代的自由主义浪潮，第34、36-40页；因镇压而对中国实施的制裁，第135页

Tibet policy, 38, 80, 98, 130, 183-84

西藏政策，38、80、98、130、183-84

total factor productivity (TFP), 155, 160

全要素生产率（TFP），155，160

totalitarianism: demise of, as most important factor in rise of democracy, 4, 8; democratization losing out to, 6, 9, 253; Deng's reforms preserving core institutions of, 23, 43, 165, 187, 254; Deng's removal of liberals enabling, 188; easy restoration of, 8, 10-13, 101, 129, 165, 186-89, 255; economic prosperity and, 4, 8, 222; features of classic regime reinstituted by Xi, 188; former Soviet states abandoning essential practices of, 7; ineffectiveness of piecemeal reform, 6-7, 10; Leninist party-state as pillar of, 187; party's entrenchment in Chinese society and state as enabling factor, 187; state violence possible without any legal constraints, 187; unique characteristics of Communist regimes, 6; Xi's leap backward, 4, 11-12, 255; Xi's revival of, 1, 2, 14, 95, 164-91

极权主义的消亡，是民主兴起的最重要因素，4，8；民主化败给了，6，9，253；邓小平的改革保留了核心制度，23，43，165，187，254；邓小平清除自由派，188；易于恢复，8，10-13，101，129，165，186-89，255；经济繁荣和，4，8，222；习近平重新确立了经典政权的特征，188；前苏联国家放弃了基本做法，7；零散改革的无效性，6-7，10；列宁主义党国是支柱，187；党在中国社会和国家中的根深蒂固是促成因素，187；国家暴力可能不受任何法律约束，187；共产主义政权的独特特征，6；习近平的倒退，4、11-12、255；习近平的复兴，1、2、14、95、164-91

township and village enterprises (TVEs), 37; communes' dismantling and, 51; dual-track pricing and, 71; employment growth of, 64; establishment and growth of, 51-52, 52f, 61, 76; as part of private sector, 52, 66, 76, 143; rural surplus labor and, 153; transformation into private firms, 143

乡镇企业（TVE），37；公社解散，51；双轨制定价，71；就业增长，64；设立和发展，51-52、52f、61、76；作为私营部门的一部分，52、66、76、143；农村剩余劳动力，153；转型为私营企业，143

trade war. See US-China trade war

贸易战。参见美中贸易战。

Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), 251, 252

跨太平洋伙伴关系协定（TPP），第251、252页

Trial Regulations on the Selection and Appointment of Party and Government Leading Cadres (1995), 85

《关于遴选和任命党政领导干部的试行条例》（1995年），第85条

Trump, Donald: blaming China for Covid-19 pandemic, 252, 258; closing Chinese consulate in Houston, 252; new cold war started by, 251, 258; TPP withdrawal by, 252; trade war with China, 150, 152, 189, 194, 204-5, 208, 220, 224, 233

特朗普，唐纳德：指责中国应对新冠疫情负责，第252、258页；关闭中国驻休斯顿总领事馆，第252页；新冷战由谁发起，第251、258页；退出TPP由谁发起，第252页；与中国打贸易战，第150、152、189、194、204-205、208、220、224、233页

Tsinghua University: law professor fired for criticizing party, 181; students and party membership, 95-96

清华大学：法学教授因批评党而被解雇，181；学生与党员身份，95-96



Uighurs, 2, 183-84

维吾尔人，2，183-84

Ukraine, Russian invasion of, 207-8, 219, 221, 224, 252

乌克兰，俄罗斯入侵，第207-208、219、221、224、252页

Umbrella Movement (student sit-ins in Hong Kong), 185

雨伞运动（香港学生静坐示威），185

United Nations, Chinese membership in, 225

联合国，中国成员国，225

United States: blue-collar jobs' losses, 204; China becoming strategic competitor to, 242; Chinese view of American hegemonism, 231, 235, 248; conflict avoidance of China with, 82, 232, 235; containment policy toward China, 207, 234, 248, 252; Deng's trade policy and, 53, 208, 226-28; economic growth based on 2000s real estate market, 244; global financial crisis (2008), effect of, 165; global war on terror, 243; Hu stabilizing relations with, 244; normalization of relations with China (1978), 226; "Pivot to Asia" policy to counter Chinese influence in region, 246; post-Cold War integration of China into global economy, 98, 135, 145, 147, 150, 223-24; preferential treatment of Hong Kong terminated by, 186; sanctions on China, 184, 252; strategic hedging as policy toward China, 234; Taiwan's independence supported by, 91, 225-27; trade deficit with China, 194, 204; Xi blaming economic problems on, 191; Xi's opposition to US role in Asian security, 248; Yinhe incident (1993) and, 91

美国：蓝领工作岗位流失，204；中国成为战略竞争对手，242；中国对美国霸权主义的看法，231、235、248；中国避免与……发生冲突，82、232、235；对华遏制政策，207、234、248、252；邓小平的贸易政策，53、208、226-228；基于2000年代房地产市场的经济增长，244；2008年全球金融危机的影响，165；全球反恐战争，243；胡锦涛稳定与中国的关系，244；与中国关系正常化（1978年），226；“重返亚洲”政策以对抗中国在该地区的影响，246；冷战后中国融入全球经济，第98、135、145、147、150、223-224页；香港优惠待遇终止，第186页；对华制裁，第184、252页；对华战略对冲政策，第234页；台湾独立得到支持，第91、225-227页；对华贸易逆差，第194、204页；习近平将经济问题归咎于，第191页；习近平反对美国在亚洲安全中扮演的角色，第248页；银河事件（1993年）及，第91页

universities: administrative responsibility system instituted by Zhao, 32; covert surveillance and student informants in,

大学：赵32建立的行政责任制；秘密监视和学生线人，

universities (continued) 93, 181-82; party membership of students, 95-96; patriotic education campaign and, 90-91; "Ten Professional Principles" (Ministry of Education) to institutionalize ideological repression in, 182 urbanization, 3, 134, 153

大学（续）93、181-82；学生党员身份，95-96；爱国主义教育运动，90-91；“十大职业原则”（教育部）将意识形态镇压制度化，182；城市化，3、134、153

US-China Agreement on Scientific and Technological Co-operation (1979), 227

《美中科技合作协定》（1979年），第227页

US-China trade war, 204-12; Biden and, 205; China vs. US in size of economy, 249; China's exports to US, drop in 2023, 205, 206t; decoupling of the two economies, 205, 207, 208, 242, 259; deleveraging campaign abandoned due to, 200, 220; food self-sufficiency as Chinese goal, 211-12; foreign direct investment and, 206; Huawei added to Entity List, 209; negotiation attempts during Trump administration, 204-5; sanctions banning China from purchasing US high-end semiconductors, 209; semiconductors and high-end chips, sanctions against China obtaining, 209-11; tariffs, 204-5; Trump and, 150, 152, 189, 194, 204, 208, 224, 233, 251, 252; Xi's response to Trump initiating, 209-11, 252

美中贸易战，204-12；拜登和，205；中美经济规模对比，249；中国对美出口，2023年下降，205、206；两国经济脱钩，205、207、208、242、259；去杠杆化运动因……而放弃，200、220；粮食自给自足是中国的目标，211-12；外国直接投资和，206；华为被列入实体清单，209；特朗普政府时期的谈判尝试，204-5；禁止中国购买美国高端半导体的制裁，209；半导体和高端芯片，对华制裁，209-11；关税，204-5；特朗普及，第150、152、189、194、204、208、224、233、251、252页；习近平对特朗普发起的回应，第209-211页、第252页



value-added tax (VAT), 136, 149

增值税（VAT），136，149

Veteran Cadres Bureau (CCP), 86

老干部局（中共），86

Vietnam: Chinese relations with, 238; economic prosperity coupled with totalitarianism, 8; South China Sea disputed claims and, 246, 250

越南：与中国的关系，238；经济繁荣与极权主义并存，8；南海争端及主权声索，246，250

villagemeittees,electionof,99

村委会选举，99



Wan Li, 20, 49

Wan Li, 20, 49

WangLijun,127,128

WangLijun,127,128

Wang Qishan, 169

Wang Qishan, 169

Wang Xiaohong, 172

Wang Xiaohong, 172

Wang Yang, 177

王阳，177

wealth: growth of private wealth, 130; not deciding factor for transition to democracy, 4, 114

财富：私人财富的增长，130；并非向民主过渡的决定性因素，4，114

Wei Jingsheng, 34, 94

Wei Jingsheng, 34, 94

Weibo (microblogging website), 179

微博（微博网站），179

Wen Jiabao, 102, 104-5, 109, 127, 157

Wen Jiabao, 102, 104-5, 109, 127, 157

West, economic engagement with: China's loss of linkages, 221, 225, 259; Chun's

西方经济交往：中国失去联系，221、225、259；Chun的

opposition to, 26-27; Deng's policy to encourage, 26-27, 45, 208, 222, 223, 253; fraying relationships due to trade deficits, 194-95, 204; golden age (1979-1989), 222, 225; Hong Kong, crackdown damaging international commerce in, 186; limited by China's insecurity, 130; post-Cold War access to Western markets, 98, 145, 147, 223-24, 254; soft-authoritarian repression reducing tensions for, 94; US-China trade war's effect on, 208-9, 220-21. See also European Union; United States

反对，26-27；邓小平鼓励的政策，26-27、45、208、222、223、253；贸易逆差导致关系紧张，194-95、204；黄金时代（1979-1989），222、225；香港镇压损害国际贸易，186；受中国不安全局势限制，130；冷战后进入西方市场，98、145、147、223-224、254；温和的威权镇压缓解了紧张局势，94；美中贸易战的影响，208-209、220-221。另见欧盟；美国

Western threats: imperialism as attempt to subjugate China, 91; regime change and democratization advocated by, 7, 178, 231, 248, 257. See also new cold war

西方威胁：帝国主义企图征服中国，第91页；主张政权更迭和民主化，第7、178、231、248、257页。另见新冷战。

World Bank, 27; Belt and Road Initiative as competition to, 250; China joining, 229; on high savings and investment rates of East Asia, 155; "Issues and Choices for Long-Term Development," 48

世界银行，27；“一带一路”倡议作为竞争对手，250；中国加入，229；关于东亚的高储蓄率和投资率，155；“长期发展的问题与选择”，48

world order: China's desire for multipolar, 235, 249-50; Deng and Xi sharing view of US-led order, 257; post-Cold War, 231; strategic initiatives to remake, 248-51; Xi's dream of Chinese superpower equal to US, 259; Xi's goal to adjust balance of power in, 247. See also Cold War; West, economic engagement with

世界秩序：中国对多极化的渴望，第235、249-250页；邓小平和习近平对美国主导的世界秩序的共同看法，第257页；后冷战时期，第231页；重塑世界秩序的战略举措，第248-251页；习近平梦想成为与美国并驾齐驱的超级大国，第259页；习近平调整权力平衡的目标，第247页。另见冷战；西方与中国的经济接触。

World Trade Organization (WTO): China's entry into, 101-3, 132, 148-52, 241; China's failure to honor commitments, 204; China's reluctance to derail entry negotiations, 240; windfall generated by China's entry into, 109, 150-51, 158, 193, 204

世界贸易组织（WTO）：中国加入世贸组织，第101-103、132、148-152、241页；中国未能履行承诺，第204页；中国不愿中断入世谈判，第240页；中国加入世贸组织带来的意外之财，第109、150-151、158、193、204页。



Xi Jinping: anticorruption campaign against political rivals, 11, 87, 120, 122, 128, 165, 169-73; background of, 124, 166, 213; benefiting from Deng's political legacy, 188-89; Bo as rival for leadership role, 127-28; break with post-Tiananmen grand strategy, 129, 224; as CCP general secretary, 1, 2; China dream of, 258-59; chosen as successor to Hu, 88, 109, 123, 126, 168, 176, 254-55; compared to Deng, 224, 257; compared to Hu, 165, 167, 173, 178, 245; compared to Jiang, 167, 178; "core leader" moniker and, 103, 174, 175; debt to GDP ratio and, 161-62, 193-94, 259; designation of potential successor prevented by, 177; disciplinary code and procedures instituted by, 173; doctorate degree of, 85; Document No. 9 and, 168, 177-78; ease of return to totalitarianism, 8, 10, 12-13, 101, 129, 165, 186-89, 255; economic problems of, 190-91; "Education and Rectification of the Nation's Political-Legal Ranks" campaign (2021), 172; foreign policy of, 131, 165, 187, 247; global ambitions of, 14; Guangdong talk (2012), 166-67; ideological hostility of, 14, 43, 177, 212, 247-48, 257; Jiang and, 124; as lifelong ruler, 2, 177; misjudgments of, 224, 257; orthodox ideological indoctrination movement launched by, 128, 166-67; peripheral regions, crackdown on, 183-86; pillars of political order for, 167; political manifesto (2013, published 2019), 166-67; promoted to PSC at Seventeenth Party Congress, 109, 124; regime protection as highest priority for, 219; repressive tactics of, 118, 179, 257; as ruthless strongman, 1, 2, 88, 99, 123, 256; Selected Letters of Xi Jinping, 176; Selected Readings of Xi Jinping's Works, 176; Shanghai Gang and, 124; "Some Questions on Maintaining and Developing Socialism with Chinese Characteristics" (2013), 177; taoguan yanghui discarded by, 246-47; as totalitarian ruler, 1, 2, 14, 95, 164-91, 256; unaffiliated with factions and poised to assume control, 126, 128; Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics in the New Era, 176. See also end of China's economic miracle; neo-Stalinism under Xi

习近平：反腐运动，打击政治对手，11、87、120、122、128、165、169-73；背景，124、166、213；受益于邓小平的政治遗产，188-89；薄熙来作为领导地位的竞争对手，127-28；与后天安门时代大战略决裂，129、224；担任中共中央总书记，1、2；中国梦，258-59；被选为胡锦涛的接班人，88、109、123、126、168、176、254-55；与邓小平的比较，224、257；与胡锦涛的比较，165、167、173、178、245；与江泽民相比，167、178；“核心领导人”称号，103、174、175；债务占GDP比率，161-62、193-94、259；指定潜在接班人受阻，177；制定的纪律守则和程序，173；博士学位，85；第9号文件，168、177-78；回归极权主义的难易程度，8、10、12-13、101、129、165、186-89、255；经济问题，190-91；“教育和整顿国家政治法律等级”运动（2021年），172；外交政策，131、165、187、247；全球野心，14；广东会谈（2012），166-67；意识形态敌意，14，43，177，212，247-48，257；江泽民和，124；作为终身统治者，2，177；误判，224，257；发起的正统意识形态灌输运动，128，166-67；边缘地区镇压，183-86；政治秩序的支柱，167；政治宣言（2013年，2019年出版），166-67；在党的十七大上晋升为国家政治委员，109，124；政权维护是最高优先事项，219；镇压策略，118，179，257；作为冷酷无情的强人，1、2、88、99、123、256；《习近平书信选》，176；《习近平著作选读》，176；《上海帮》，124；《关于保持和发展中国特色社会主义的几个问题》（2013），177；《桃冠杨辉被弃》，246-247；作为极权统治者，1、2、14、95、164-191、256；不隶属于任何派系，随时准备掌控大局，126、128；《习近平关于新时代中国特色社会主义的思想》，176。另见：中国经济奇迹的终结；习近平领导下的新斯大林主义。

Xi Zhongxun, 20, 56

Xi Zhongxun, 20, 56

Xiamen smuggling scandal, 100

厦门走私丑闻，100

Xiang Nan, 63

Xiang Nan, 63

Xinjiang province, 183-84; ethnic riot (2009), 130. See also Uighurs

新疆省，183-84；民族骚乱（2009），130。另见维吾尔族

Xu Caihou, 170-71

Xu Caihou, 170-71

Xu Zhiyong, 119, 180

Xu Zhiyong, 119, 180



YangJisheng,19,78

YangJisheng,19,78

Yang Shangkun, 56

Yang Shangkun, 56

Yao Yilin, 39, 40, 75-76

Yao Yilin, 39, 40, 75-76

Yeltsin, Boris, 237

叶利钦，鲍里斯，237

Yinhe incident (1993), 91

Yinhe incident (1993), 91

Youth League. See Communist Youth League

青年团。参见共产主义青年团。

Yu Zhengsheng, 114

Yu Zhengsheng, 114



Zhao Ziyang: agricultural reform and, 49, 50; background of, 18; balanced economy and, 158; on CCP's strength as paramount, 19; Central Political and Legal Affairs Commission abolished by, 92; "Central Research Small Group on Political System Reform" formed by, 30; on Chen vs. Deng on policy of opening, 24-25, 27; Chen's support for some reforms of, 26; on decision-making power kept by party elders, 24-25; on Deng and Hu rift, 38; Deng working with directly, 27; Deng's purge of, 41, 75, 79, 86, 98, 188, 254, 256; Deng's relationship with, 37, 39-40; on dual-track economy of private and state-owned segments, 73; hard-liners turning on, 39-40, 42; Hua's ouster and, 18; human rights in 1980s and, 230; inflation blamed on, 37, 40; keynote speaker at Thirteenth Party Congress (1987), 39; legacy of reform from, 42-43, 135, 145; as liberal reformer, 3, 5, 19, 27, 39, 73; "May 13 speech against conservatives," 39; on neo-authoritarianism of Deng, 81; "Overall Design for Political System Reform" presented by, 30, 31, 42; political reform attempts of, 29-32, 43; on private sector growth, 61, 62; replacing Hu Yaobang, 16, 36, 39, 40, 42; saving liberal party members from Deng's punishment, 25; separation of powers proposed by, 30-32, 88; on SOEs reform failure, 69-70; Tiananmen protests and, 40-41; visit to US, 227

赵紫阳：农业改革及，49、50；背景，18；平衡经济及，158；论中共实力至上，19；中央政法委被废除，92；“中央政治体制改革研究小组”成立，30；论陈与邓小平的改革政策，24-25、27；陈对某些改革的支持，26；论决策权掌握在党内元老手中，24-25；论邓小平与胡锦涛的裂痕，38；邓小平直接与……合作，27；邓小平的清洗，41、75、79、86、98、188、254、256；邓小平与……的关系，37、39-40；论私营和国有经济的双轨制，73；强硬派的转变，39-40，42；华夏幸福的下台，18；20世纪80年代的人权，230；通货膨胀的归咎于，37，40；十三大（1987年）的主旨演讲人，39；改革的遗产，42-43，135，145；作为自由派改革者，3，5，19，27，39，73；“五一三反对保守派的讲话”，39；论邓小平的新威权主义，81；提出的“政治体制改革总体设计”，30，31，42；政治改革的尝试，29-32，43；论私营部门的增长，61，62；取代胡耀邦，16，36，39，40，42；拯救自由派党员免受邓小平惩罚，第25页；提出的权力分立，第30-32页、第88页；关于国有企业改革失败，第69-70页；天安门事件，第40-41页；访美，第227页。

Zhou Yongkang, 112, 170

Zhou Yongkang, 112, 170

Zhu Rongji, 76, 80, 87, 135, 136, 138, 150

Zhu Rongji, 76, 80, 87, 135, 136, 138, 150





